=begin man

=encoding utf8

=end man

=head1 NAME

wireshark - Interactively dump and analyze network traffic

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<wireshark>
S<[ B<-i> E<lt>capture interfaceE<gt>|- ]>
S<[ B<-f> E<lt>capture filterE<gt> ]>
S<[ B<-Y> E<lt>displaY filterE<gt> ]>
S<[ B<-w> E<lt>outfileE<gt> ]>
S<[ B<options> ]>
S<[ E<lt>infileE<gt> ]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<Wireshark> is a GUI network protocol analyzer.  It lets you
interactively browse packet data from a live network or from a
previously saved capture file.  B<Wireshark>'s native capture file format
is B<pcapng> format, or B<pcap> which is also the format used by B<tcpdump> and
various other tools.

B<Wireshark> can read / import the following file formats:

=over 4

=item *
pcap - captures from B<Wireshark>/B<TShark>/B<dumpcap>, B<tcpdump>,
and various other tools using libpcap's/Npcap's/WinPcap's/tcpdump's/WinDump's
capture format

=item *
pcapng - "next-generation" successor to pcap format

=item *
B<snoop> and B<atmsnoop> captures

=item *
Shomiti/Finisar B<Surveyor> captures

=item *
Novell B<LANalyzer> captures

=item *
Microsoft B<Network Monitor> captures

=item *
AIX's B<iptrace> captures

=item *
Cinco Networks B<NetXRay> captures

=item *
Network Associates Windows-based B<Sniffer> captures

=item *
Network General/Network Associates DOS-based B<Sniffer> (compressed or uncompressed) captures

=item *
AG Group/WildPackets/Savvius B<EtherPeek>/B<TokenPeek>/B<AiroPeek>/B<EtherHelp>/B<PacketGrabber> captures

=item *
B<RADCOM>'s WAN/LAN analyzer captures

=item *
Network Instruments B<Observer> version 9 captures

=item *
B<Lucent/Ascend> router debug output

=item *
files from HP-UX's B<nettl>

=item *
B<Toshiba's> ISDN routers dump output

=item *
the output from B<i4btrace> from the ISDN4BSD project

=item *
traces from the B<EyeSDN> USB S0.

=item *
the output in B<IPLog> format from the Cisco Secure Intrusion Detection System

=item *
B<pppd logs> (pppdump format)

=item *
the output from VMS's B<TCPIPtrace>/B<TCPtrace>/B<UCX$TRACE> utilities

=item *
the text output from the B<DBS Etherwatch> VMS utility

=item *
Visual Networks' B<Visual UpTime> traffic capture

=item *
the output from B<CoSine> L2 debug

=item *
the output from InfoVista's B<5View> LAN agents

=item *
Endace Measurement Systems' ERF format captures

=item *
Linux Bluez Bluetooth stack B<hcidump -w> traces

=item *
Catapult DCT2000 .out files

=item *
Gammu generated text output from Nokia DCT3 phones in Netmonitor mode

=item *
IBM Series (OS/400) Comm traces (ASCII & UNICODE)

=item *
Juniper Netscreen snoop files

=item *
Symbian OS btsnoop files

=item *
TamoSoft CommView files

=item *
Textronix K12xx 32bit .rf5 format files

=item *
Textronix K12 text file format captures

=item *
Apple PacketLogger files

=item *
Files from Aethra Telecommunications' PC108 software for their test
instruments

=item *
MPEG-2 Transport Streams as defined in ISO/IEC 13818-1

=item *
Rabbit Labs CAM Inspector files

=item *
Colasoft Capsa files

=back

There is no need to tell B<Wireshark> what type of
file you are reading; it will determine the file type by itself.
B<Wireshark> is also capable of reading any of these file formats if they
are compressed using gzip.  B<Wireshark> recognizes this directly from
the file; the '.gz' extension is not required for this purpose.

Like other protocol analyzers, B<Wireshark>'s main window shows 3 views
of a packet.  It shows a summary line, briefly describing what the
packet is.  A packet details display is shown, allowing you to drill
down to exact protocol or field that you interested in.  Finally, a hex
dump shows you exactly what the packet looks like when it goes over the
wire.

In addition, B<Wireshark> has some features that make it unique.  It can
assemble all the packets in a TCP conversation and show you the ASCII
(or EBCDIC, or hex) data in that conversation.  Display filters in
B<Wireshark> are very powerful; more fields are filterable in B<Wireshark>
than in other protocol analyzers, and the syntax you can use to create
your filters is richer.  As B<Wireshark> progresses, expect more and more
protocol fields to be allowed in display filters.

Packet capturing is performed with the pcap library.  The capture filter
syntax follows the rules of the pcap library.  This syntax is different
from the display filter syntax.

Compressed file support uses (and therefore requires) the zlib library.
If the zlib library is not present, B<Wireshark> will compile, but will
be unable to read compressed files.

The pathname of a capture file to be read can be specified with the
B<-r> option or can be specified as a command-line argument.

=head1 OPTIONS

Most users will want to start B<Wireshark> without options and configure
it from the menus instead.  Those users may just skip this section.

=over 4

=item -a|--autostop  E<lt>capture autostop conditionE<gt>

Specify a criterion that specifies when B<Wireshark> is to stop writing
to a capture file.  The criterion is of the form I<test>B<:>I<value>,
where I<test> is one of:

B<duration>:I<value> Stop writing to a capture file after I<value> seconds have
elapsed. Floating point values (e.g. 0.5) are allowed.

B<files>:I<value> Stop writing to capture files after I<value> number of files
were written.

B<filesize>:I<value> Stop writing to a capture file after it reaches a size of
I<value> kB.  If this option is used together with the -b option, Wireshark
will stop writing to the current capture file and switch to the next one if
filesize is reached.  Note that the filesize is limited to a maximum value of
2 GiB.

B<packets>:I<value> Stop writing to a capture file after it contains I<value>
packets. Same as B<-c>E<lt>capture packet countE<gt>.

=item -b|--ring-buffer  E<lt>capture ring buffer optionE<gt>

Cause B<Wireshark> to run in "multiple files" mode.  In "multiple files" mode,
B<Wireshark> will write to several capture files.  When the first capture file
fills up, B<Wireshark> will switch writing to the next file and so on.

The created filenames are based on the filename given with the B<-w> flag,
the number of the file and on the creation date and time,
e.g. outfile_00001_20200714120117.pcap, outfile_00002_20200714120523.pcap, ...

With the I<files> option it's also possible to form a "ring buffer".
This will fill up new files until the number of files specified,
at which point B<Wireshark> will discard the data in the first file and start
writing to that file and so on.  If the I<files> option is not set,
new files filled up until one of the capture stop conditions match (or
until the disk is full).

The criterion is of the form I<key>B<:>I<value>,
where I<key> is one of:

B<duration>:I<value> switch to the next file after I<value> seconds have
elapsed, even if the current file is not completely filled up. Floating
point values (e.g. 0.5) are allowed.

B<files>:I<value> begin again with the first file after I<value> number of
files were written (form a ring buffer).  This value must be less than 100000.
Caution should be used when using large numbers of files: some filesystems do
not handle many files in a single directory well.  The B<files> criterion
requires one of the other criteria to be specified to
control when to go to the next file.  It should be noted that each B<-b>
parameter takes exactly one criterion; to specify two criteria, each must be
preceded by the B<-b> option.

B<filesize>:I<value> switch to the next file after it reaches a size of
I<value> kB.  Note that the filesize is limited to a maximum value of 2 GiB.

B<interval>:I<value> switch to the next file when the time is an exact
multiple of I<value> seconds.

B<packets>:I<value> switch to the next file after it contains I<value>
packets.

Example: B<-b filesize:1000 -b files:5> results in a ring buffer of five files
of size one megabyte each.

=item -B|--buffer-size  E<lt>capture buffer sizeE<gt>

Set capture buffer size (in MiB, default is 2 MiB).  This is used by
the capture driver to buffer packet data until that data can be written
to disk.  If you encounter packet drops while capturing, try to increase
this size.  Note that, while B<Wireshark> attempts to set the buffer size
to 2 MiB by default, and can be told to set it to a larger value, the
system or interface on which you're capturing might silently limit the
capture buffer size to a lower value or raise it to a higher value.

This is available on UNIX systems with libpcap 1.0.0 or later and on
Windows.  It is not available on UNIX systems with earlier versions of
libpcap.

This option can occur multiple times.  If used before the first
occurrence of the B<-i> option, it sets the default capture buffer size.
If used after an B<-i> option, it sets the capture buffer size for
the interface specified by the last B<-i> option occurring before
this option.  If the capture buffer size is not set specifically,
the default capture buffer size is used instead.

=item -c  E<lt>capture packet countE<gt>

Set the maximum number of packets to read when capturing live
data. Same as B<-a packets:>E<lt>capture packet countE<gt>.

=item -C  E<lt>configuration profileE<gt>

Start with the given configuration profile.

=item --capture-comment E<lt>commentE<gt>

Set the capture file comment, if supported by the capture format.

=item -d  E<lt>layer typeE<gt>==E<lt>selectorE<gt>,E<lt>decode-as protocolE<gt>

Like Wireshark's B<Decode As...> feature, this lets you specify how a
layer type should be dissected.  If the layer type in question (for example,
B<tcp.port> or B<udp.port> for a TCP or UDP port number) has the specified
selector value, packets should be dissected as the specified protocol.

Example: B<-d tcp.port==8888,http> will decode any traffic running over
TCP port 8888 as HTTP.

See the tshark(1) manual page for more examples.

=item -D|--list-interfaces

Print a list of the interfaces on which B<Wireshark> can capture, and
exit.  For each network interface, a number and an
interface name, possibly followed by a text description of the
interface, is printed.  The interface name or the number can be supplied
to the B<-i> flag to specify an interface on which to capture.

This can be useful on systems that don't have a command to list them
(UNIX systems lacking B<ifconfig -a> or Linux systems lacking
B<ip link show>). The number can be useful on Windows systems, where
the interface name might be a long name or a GUID.

Note that "can capture" means that B<Wireshark> was able to open
that device to do a live capture; if, on your system, a program doing a
network capture must be run from an account with special privileges (for
example, as root), then, if B<Wireshark> is run with the B<-D> flag and
is not run from such an account, it will not list any interfaces.

=item --display E<lt>X display to useE<gt>

Specifies the X display to use.  A hostname and screen (otherhost:0.0)
or just a screen (:0.0) can be specified.  This option is not available
under Windows.

=item --disable-protocol E<lt>proto_nameE<gt>

Disable dissection of proto_name.

=item --disable-heuristic E<lt>short_nameE<gt>

Disable dissection of heuristic protocol.

=item --enable-protocol E<lt>proto_nameE<gt>

Enable dissection of proto_name.

=item --enable-heuristic E<lt>short_nameE<gt>

Enable dissection of heuristic protocol.

=item -f  E<lt>capture filterE<gt>

Set the capture filter expression.

This option can occur multiple times.  If used before the first
occurrence of the B<-i> option, it sets the default capture filter expression.
If used after an B<-i> option, it sets the capture filter expression for
the interface specified by the last B<-i> option occurring before
this option.  If the capture filter expression is not set specifically,
the default capture filter expression is used if provided.

Pre-defined capture filter names, as shown in the GUI menu item Capture->Capture Filters,
can be used by prefixing the argument with "predef:".
Example: B<-f "predef:MyPredefinedHostOnlyFilter">

=item --fullscreen

Start Wireshark in full screen mode (kiosk mode). To exit from fullscreen mode,
open the View menu and select the Full Screen option. Alternatively, press the
F11 key (or Ctrl + Cmd + F for macOS).

=item -g  E<lt>packet numberE<gt>

After reading in a capture file using the B<-r> flag, go to the given I<packet number>.

=item -h|--help

Print the version number and options and exit.

=item -H

Hide the capture info dialog during live packet capture.

=item -i|--interface  E<lt>capture interfaceE<gt>|-

Set the name of the network interface or pipe to use for live packet
capture.

Network interface names should match one of the names listed in
"B<wireshark -D>" (described above); a number, as reported by
"B<wireshark -D>", can also be used.  If you're using UNIX, "B<netstat
-i>", "B<ifconfig -a>" or "B<ip link>" might also work to list interface names,
although not all versions of UNIX support the B<-a> flag to B<ifconfig>.

If no interface is specified, B<Wireshark> searches the list of
interfaces, choosing the first non-loopback interface if there are any
non-loopback interfaces, and choosing the first loopback interface if
there are no non-loopback interfaces.  If there are no interfaces at all,
B<Wireshark> reports an error and doesn't start the capture.

Pipe names should be either the name of a FIFO (named pipe) or "-" to
read data from the standard input.  On Windows systems, pipe names must be
of the form "\\pipe\.\B<pipename>".  Data read from pipes must be in
standard pcapng or pcap format. Pcapng data must have the same
endianness as the capturing host.

This option can occur multiple times. When capturing from multiple
interfaces, the capture file will be saved in pcapng format.

=item -I|--monitor-mode

Put the interface in "monitor mode"; this is supported only on IEEE
802.11 Wi-Fi interfaces, and supported only on some operating systems.

Note that in monitor mode the adapter might disassociate from the
network with which it's associated, so that you will not be able to use
any wireless networks with that adapter.  This could prevent accessing
files on a network server, or resolving host names or network addresses,
if you are capturing in monitor mode and are not connected to another
network with another adapter.

This option can occur multiple times.  If used before the first
occurrence of the B<-i> option, it enables the monitor mode for all interfaces.
If used after an B<-i> option, it enables the monitor mode for
the interface specified by the last B<-i> option occurring before
this option.

=item -j

Use after B<-J> to change the behavior when no exact match is found for
the filter.  With this option select the first packet before.

=item -J  E<lt>jump filterE<gt>

After reading in a capture file using the B<-r> flag, jump to the packet
matching the filter (display filter syntax).  If no exact match is found
the first packet after that is selected.

=item -k

Start the capture session immediately.  If the B<-i> flag was
specified, the capture uses the specified interface.  Otherwise,
B<Wireshark> searches the list of interfaces, choosing the first
non-loopback interface if there are any non-loopback interfaces, and
choosing the first loopback interface if there are no non-loopback
interfaces; if there are no interfaces, B<Wireshark> reports an error and
doesn't start the capture.

=item -K  E<lt>keytabE<gt>

Load kerberos crypto keys from the specified keytab file.
This option can be used multiple times to load keys from several files.

Example: B<-K krb5.keytab>

=item -l

Turn on automatic scrolling if the packet display is being updated
automatically as packets arrive during a capture (as specified by the
B<-S> flag).

=item -L|--list-data-link-types

List the data link types supported by the interface and exit.

=item --list-time-stamp-types

List time stamp types supported for the interface. If no time stamp type can be
set, no time stamp types are listed.

=item -n

Disable network object name resolution (such as hostname, TCP and UDP port
names), the B<-N> flag might override this one.

=item -N  E<lt>name resolving flagsE<gt>

Turn on name resolving only for particular types of addresses and port
numbers, with name resolving for other types of addresses and port
numbers turned off.  This flag overrides B<-n> if both B<-N> and B<-n> are
present.  If both B<-N> and B<-n> flags are not present, all name resolutions
are turned on.

The argument is a string that may contain the letters:

B<m> to enable MAC address resolution

B<n> to enable network address resolution

B<N> to enable using external resolvers (e.g., DNS) for network address
resolution

B<t> to enable transport-layer port number resolution

B<d> to enable resolution from captured DNS packets

B<v> to enable VLAN IDs to names resolution

=item -o  E<lt>preference/recent settingE<gt>

Set a preference or recent value, overriding the default value and any value
read from a preference/recent file.  The argument to the flag is a string of
the form I<prefname>B<:>I<value>, where I<prefname> is the name of the
preference/recent value (which is the same name that would appear in the
preference/recent file), and I<value> is the value to which it should be set.
Since B<Ethereal> 0.10.12, the recent settings replaces the formerly used
-B, -P and -T flags to manipulate the GUI dimensions.

If I<prefname> is "uat", you can override settings in various user access
tables using the form uatB<:>I<uat filename>:I<uat record>.  I<uat filename>
must be the name of a UAT file, e.g. I<user_dlts>.  I<uat_record> must be in
the form of a valid record for that file, including quotes.  For instance, to
specify a user DLT from the command line, you would use

    -o "uat:user_dlts:\"User 0 (DLT=147)\",\"cops\",\"0\",\"\",\"0\",\"\""

=item -p|--no-promiscuous-mode

I<Don't> put the interface into promiscuous mode.  Note that the
interface might be in promiscuous mode for some other reason; hence,
B<-p> cannot be used to ensure that the only traffic that is captured is
traffic sent to or from the machine on which B<Wireshark> is running,
broadcast traffic, and multicast traffic to addresses received by that
machine.

This option can occur multiple times.  If used before the first
occurrence of the B<-i> option, no interface will be put into the
promiscuous mode.
If used after an B<-i> option, the interface specified by the last B<-i>
option occurring before this option will not be put into the
promiscuous mode.

=item -P E<lt>path settingE<gt>

Special path settings usually detected automatically.  This is used for
special cases, e.g. starting Wireshark from a known location on an USB stick.

The criterion is of the form I<key>B<:>I<path>, where I<key> is one of:

B<persconf>:I<path> path of personal configuration files, like the
preferences files.

B<persdata>:I<path> path of personal data files, it's the folder initially
opened.  After the very first initialization, the recent file will keep the
folder last used.

=item -r|--read-file  E<lt>infileE<gt>

Read packet data from I<infile>, can be any supported capture file format
(including gzipped files).  It's not possible to use named pipes or stdin
here! To capture from a pipe or from stdin use B<-i ->

=item -R|--read-filter  E<lt>read (display) filterE<gt>

When reading a capture file specified with the B<-r> flag, causes the
specified filter (which uses the syntax of display filters, rather than
that of capture filters) to be applied to all packets read from the
capture file; packets not matching the filter are discarded.

=item -s|--snapshot-length  E<lt>capture snaplenE<gt>

Set the default snapshot length to use when capturing live data.
No more than I<snaplen> bytes of each network packet will be read into
memory, or saved to disk.  A value of 0 specifies a snapshot length of
262144, so that the full packet is captured; this is the default.

This option can occur multiple times.  If used before the first
occurrence of the B<-i> option, it sets the default snapshot length.
If used after an B<-i> option, it sets the snapshot length for
the interface specified by the last B<-i> option occurring before
this option.  If the snapshot length is not set specifically,
the default snapshot length is used if provided.

=item -S

Automatically update the packet display as packets are coming in.

=item -t  a|ad|adoy|d|dd|e|r|u|ud|udoy

Set the format of the packet timestamp displayed in the packet list
window.  The format can be one of:

B<a> absolute: The absolute time, as local time in your time zone,
is the actual time the packet was captured, with no date displayed

B<ad> absolute with date: The absolute date, displayed as YYYY-MM-DD,
and time, as local time in your time zone, is the actual time and date
the packet was captured

B<adoy> absolute with date using day of year: The absolute date,
displayed as YYYY/DOY, and time, as local time in your time zone,
is the actual time and date the packet was captured

B<d> delta: The delta time is the time since the previous packet was
captured

B<dd> delta_displayed: The delta_displayed time is the time since the
previous displayed packet was captured

B<e> epoch: The time in seconds since epoch (Jan 1, 1970 00:00:00)

B<r> relative: The relative time is the time elapsed between the first packet
and the current packet

B<u> UTC: The absolute time, as UTC, is the actual time the packet was
captured, with no date displayed

B<ud> UTC with date: The absolute date, displayed as YYYY-MM-DD,
and time, as UTC, is the actual time and date the packet was captured

B<udoy> UTC with date using day of year: The absolute date, displayed
as YYYY/DOY, and time, as UTC, is the actual time and date the packet
was captured

The default format is relative.

=item --time-stamp-type E<lt>typeE<gt>

Change the interface's timestamp method. See --list-time-stamp-types.

=item -u E<lt>s|hmsE<gt>

Output format of seconds (def: s: seconds)

=item -v|--version

Print the full version information and exit.

=item -w  E<lt>outfileE<gt>

Set the default capture file name, or '-' for standard output.

=item -X E<lt>eXtension optionsE<gt>

Specify an option to be passed to an B<Wireshark> module.  The eXtension option
is in the form I<extension_key>B<:>I<value>, where I<extension_key> can be:

B<lua_script>:I<lua_script_filename> tells B<Wireshark> to load the given script in addition to the
default Lua scripts.

B<lua_script>I<num>:I<argument> tells B<Wireshark> to pass the given argument
to the lua script identified by 'num', which is the number indexed order of the 'lua_script' command.
For example, if only one script was loaded with '-X lua_script:my.lua', then '-X lua_script1:foo'
will pass the string 'foo' to the 'my.lua' script.  If two scripts were loaded, such as '-X lua_script:my.lua'
and '-X lua_script:other.lua' in that order, then a '-X lua_script2:bar' would pass the string 'bar' to the second lua
script, namely 'other.lua'.

B<read_format>:I<file_format> tells B<Wireshark> to use the given file format to read in the
file (the file given in the B<-r> command option).

B<stdin_descr>:I<description> tells B<Wireshark> to use the given description when
capturing from standard input (B<-i ->).

=item -y|--linktype  E<lt>capture link typeE<gt>

If a capture is started from the command line with B<-k>, set the data
link type to use while capturing packets.  The values reported by B<-L>
are the values that can be used.

This option can occur multiple times.  If used before the first
occurrence of the B<-i> option, it sets the default capture link type.
If used after an B<-i> option, it sets the capture link type for
the interface specified by the last B<-i> option occurring before
this option.  If the capture link type is not set specifically,
the default capture link type is used if provided.

=item -Y|--display-filter  E<lt>displaY filterE<gt>

Start with the given display filter.

=item -z  E<lt>statisticsE<gt>

Get B<Wireshark> to collect various types of statistics and display the result
in a window that updates in semi-real time.

Currently implemented statistics are:

=over 4

=item B<-z help>

Display all possible values for B<-z>.

=item B<-z> afp,srt[,I<filter>]

Show Apple Filing Protocol service response time statistics.

=item B<-z> conv,I<type>[,I<filter>]

Create a table that lists all conversations that could be seen in the
capture.  I<type> specifies the conversation endpoint types for which we
want to generate the statistics; currently the supported ones are:

  "eth"   Ethernet addresses
  "fc"    Fibre Channel addresses
  "fddi"  FDDI addresses
  "ip"    IPv4 addresses
  "ipv6"  IPv6 addresses
  "ipx"   IPX addresses
  "tcp"   TCP/IP socket pairs   Both IPv4 and IPv6 are supported
  "tr"    Token Ring addresses
  "udp"   UDP/IP socket pairs   Both IPv4 and IPv6 are supported

If the optional I<filter> is specified, only those packets that match the
filter will be used in the calculations.

The table is presented with one line for each conversation and displays
the number of packets/bytes in each direction as well as the total
number of packets/bytes.  By default, the table is sorted according to
the total number of packets.

These tables can also be generated at runtime by selecting the appropriate
conversation type from the menu "Tools/Statistics/Conversation List/".

=item B<-z> dcerpc,srt,I<name-or-uuid>,I<major>.I<minor>[,I<filter>]

Collect call/reply SRT (Service Response Time) data for DCERPC interface
I<name> or I<uuid>, version I<major>.I<minor>.
Data collected is the number of calls for each procedure, MinSRT, MaxSRT
and AvgSRT.
Interface I<name> and I<uuid> are case-insensitive.

Example: S<B<-z dcerpc,srt,12345778-1234-abcd-ef00-0123456789ac,1.0>> will collect data for the CIFS SAMR Interface.

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter>  is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: S<B<-z dcerpc,srt,12345778-1234-abcd-ef00-0123456789ac,1.0,ip.addr==1.2.3.4>> will collect SAMR
SRT statistics for a specific host.

=item B<-z> bootp,stat[,I<filter>]

Show DHCP (BOOTP) statistics.

=item B<-z> expert

Show expert information.

=item B<-z> fc,srt[,I<filter>]

Collect call/reply SRT (Service Response Time) data for FC.  Data collected
is the number of calls for each Fibre Channel command, MinSRT, MaxSRT and AvgSRT.

Example: B<-z fc,srt>
will calculate the Service Response Time as the time delta between the
First packet of the exchange and the Last packet of the exchange.

The data will be presented as separate tables for all normal FC commands,
Only those commands that are seen in the capture will have its stats
displayed.

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z "fc,srt,fc.id==01.02.03"> will collect stats only for
FC packets exchanged by the host at FC address 01.02.03 .

=item B<-z> h225,counter[I<,filter>]

Count ITU-T H.225 messages and their reasons.  In the first column you get a
list of H.225 messages and H.225 message reasons which occur in the current
capture file.  The number of occurrences of each message or reason is displayed
in the second column.

Example: B<-z h225,counter>

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z "h225,counter,ip.addr==1.2.3.4"> will collect stats only for
H.225 packets exchanged by the host at IP address 1.2.3.4 .

=item B<-z> h225,srt[I<,filter>]

Collect request/response SRT (Service Response Time) data for ITU-T H.225 RAS.
Data collected is the number of calls of each ITU-T H.225 RAS Message Type,
Minimum SRT, Maximum SRT, Average SRT, Minimum in Packet, and Maximum in Packet.
You will also get the number of Open Requests (Unresponded Requests),
Discarded Responses (Responses without matching request) and Duplicate Messages.

Example: B<-z h225,srt>

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z "h225,srt,ip.addr==1.2.3.4"> will collect stats only for
ITU-T H.225 RAS packets exchanged by the host at IP address 1.2.3.4 .

=item B<-z> io,stat

Collect packet/bytes statistics for the capture in intervals of 1 second.
This option will open a window with up to 5 color-coded graphs where
number-of-packets-per-second or number-of-bytes-per-second statistics
can be calculated and displayed.

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

This graph window can also be opened from the Analyze:Statistics:Traffic:IO-Stat
menu item.

=item B<-z> ldap,srt[,I<filter>]

Collect call/reply SRT (Service Response Time) data for LDAP.  Data collected
is the number of calls for each implemented LDAP command, MinSRT, MaxSRT and AvgSRT.

Example: B<-z ldap,srt>
will calculate the Service Response Time as the time delta between the
Request and the Response.

The data will be presented as separate tables for all implemented LDAP commands,
Only those commands that are seen in the capture will have its stats
displayed.

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: use B<-z "ldap,srt,ip.addr==10.1.1.1"> will collect stats only for
LDAP packets exchanged by the host at IP address 10.1.1.1 .

The only LDAP commands that are currently implemented and for which the stats will be available are:
BIND
SEARCH
MODIFY
ADD
DELETE
MODRDN
COMPARE
EXTENDED

=item B<-z> megaco,srt[I<,filter>]

Collect request/response SRT (Service Response Time) data for MEGACO.
(This is similar to B<-z smb,srt>).  Data collected is the number of calls
for each known MEGACO Command, Minimum SRT, Maximum SRT and Average SRT.

Example: B<-z megaco,srt>

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z "megaco,srt,ip.addr==1.2.3.4"> will collect stats only for
MEGACO packets exchanged by the host at IP address 1.2.3.4 .

=item B<-z> mgcp,srt[I<,filter>]

Collect request/response SRT (Service Response Time) data for MGCP.
(This is similar to B<-z smb,srt>).  Data collected is the number of calls
for each known MGCP Type, Minimum SRT, Maximum SRT and Average SRT.

Example: B<-z mgcp,srt>

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z "mgcp,srt,ip.addr==1.2.3.4"> will collect stats only for
MGCP packets exchanged by the host at IP address 1.2.3.4 .

=item B<-z> mtp3,msus[,<filter>]

Show MTP3 MSU statistics.

=item B<-z> multicast,stat[,<filter>]

Show UDP multicast stream statistics.

=item B<-z> rpc,programs

Collect call/reply SRT data for all known ONC-RPC programs/versions.
Data collected is the number of calls for each protocol/version, MinSRT,
MaxSRT and AvgSRT.

=item B<-z> rpc,srt,I<name-or-number>,I<version>[,<filter>]

Collect call/reply SRT (Service Response Time) data for program
I<name>/I<version> or I<number>/I<version>.
Data collected is the number of calls for each procedure, MinSRT, MaxSRT and
AvgSRT.
Program I<name> is case-insensitive.

Example: B<-z rpc,srt,100003,3> will collect data for NFS v3.

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: S<B<-z rpc,srt,nfs,3,nfs.fh.hash==0x12345678>> will collect NFS v3
SRT statistics for a specific file.

=item B<-z> scsi,srt,I<cmdset>[,<filter>]

Collect call/reply SRT (Service Response Time) data for SCSI commandset <cmdset>.

Commandsets are 0:SBC   1:SSC  5:MMC

Data collected
is the number of calls for each procedure, MinSRT, MaxSRT and AvgSRT.

Example: B<-z scsi,srt,0> will collect data for SCSI BLOCK COMMANDS (SBC).

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z scsi,srt,0,ip.addr==1.2.3.4> will collect SCSI SBC
SRT statistics for a specific iscsi/ifcp/fcip host.

=item B<-z> sip,stat[I<,filter>]

This option will activate a counter for SIP messages.  You will get the number
of occurrences of each SIP Method and of each SIP Status-Code.  Additionally you
also get the number of resent SIP Messages (only for SIP over UDP).

Example: B<-z sip,stat>

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z "sip,stat,ip.addr==1.2.3.4"> will collect stats only for
SIP packets exchanged by the host at IP address 1.2.3.4 .

=item B<-z> smb,srt[,I<filter>]

Collect call/reply SRT (Service Response Time) data for SMB.  Data collected
is the number of calls for each SMB command, MinSRT, MaxSRT and AvgSRT.

Example: B<-z smb,srt>

The data will be presented as separate tables for all normal SMB commands,
all Transaction2 commands and all NT Transaction commands.
Only those commands that are seen in the capture will have their stats
displayed.
Only the first command in a xAndX command chain will be used in the
calculation.  So for common SessionSetupAndX + TreeConnectAndX chains,
only the SessionSetupAndX call will be used in the statistics.
This is a flaw that might be fixed in the future.

This option can be used multiple times on the command line.

If the optional I<filter> is provided, the stats will only be calculated
on those calls that match that filter.

Example: B<-z "smb,srt,ip.addr==1.2.3.4"> will collect stats only for
SMB packets exchanged by the host at IP address 1.2.3.4 .

=item B<-z> voip,calls

This option will show a window that shows VoIP calls found in the capture file.
This is the same window shown as when you go to the Statistics Menu and choose
VoIP Calls.

Example: B<-z voip,calls>

=item B<-z> wlan,stat[,<filter>]

Show IEEE 802.11 network and station statistics.

=item B<-z> wsp,stat[,<filter>]

Show WSP packet counters.

=back

=back

=head1 INTERFACE

=head2 MENU ITEMS

=over 4

=item File:Open

=item File:Open Recent

=item File:Merge

Merge another capture file to the currently loaded one.  The I<File:Merge>
dialog box allows the merge "Prepended", "Chronologically" or "Appended",
relative to the already loaded one.

=item File:Close

Open or close a capture file.  The I<File:Open> dialog box
allows a filter to be specified; when the capture file is read, the
filter is applied to all packets read from the file, and packets not
matching the filter are discarded.  The I<File:Open Recent> is a submenu
and will show a list of previously opened files.

=item File:Save

=item File:Save As

Save the current capture, or the packets currently displayed from that
capture, to a file.  Check boxes let you select whether to save all
packets, or just those that have passed the current display filter and/or
those that are currently marked, and an option menu lets you select (from
a list of file formats in which at particular capture, or the packets
currently displayed from that capture, can be saved), a file format in
which to save it.

=item File:File Set:List Files

Show a dialog box that lists all files of the file set matching the currently
loaded file.  A file set is a compound of files resulting from a capture using
the "multiple files" / "ringbuffer" mode, recognizable by the filename pattern,
e.g.: Filename_00001_20200714101530.pcap.

=item File:File Set:Next File

=item File:File Set:Previous File

If the currently loaded file is part of a file set (see above), open the
next / previous file in that set.

=item File:Export

Export captured data into an external format.  Note: the data cannot be
imported back into Wireshark, so be sure to keep the capture file.

=item File:Print

Print packet data from the current capture.  You can select the range of
packets to be printed (which packets are printed), and the output format of
each packet (how each packet is printed).  The output format will be similar
to the displayed values, so a summary line, the packet details view, and/or
the hex dump of the packet can be printed.

Printing options can be set with the I<Edit:Preferences> menu item, or in the
dialog box popped up by this menu item.

=item File:Quit

Exit the application.

=item Edit:Copy:Description

Copies the description of the selected field in the protocol tree to
the clipboard.

=item Edit:Copy:Fieldname

Copies the fieldname of the selected field in the protocol tree to
the clipboard.

=item Edit:Copy:Value

Copies the value of the selected field in the protocol tree to
the clipboard.

=item Edit:Copy:As Filter

Create a display filter based on the data currently highlighted in the
packet details and copy that filter to the clipboard.

If that data is a field that can be tested in a display filter
expression, the display filter will test that field; otherwise, the
display filter will be based on the absolute offset within the packet.
Therefore it could be unreliable if the packet contains protocols with
variable-length headers, such as a source-routed token-ring packet.

=item Edit:Find Packet

Search forward or backward, starting with the currently selected packet
(or the most recently selected packet, if no packet is selected).  Search
criteria can be a display filter expression, a string of hexadecimal
digits, or a text string.

When searching for a text string, you can search the packet data, or you
can search the text in the Info column in the packet list pane or in the
packet details pane.

Hexadecimal digits can be separated by colons, periods, or dashes.
Text string searches can be ASCII or Unicode (or both), and may be
case insensitive.

=item Edit:Find Next

=item Edit:Find Previous

Search forward / backward for a packet matching the filter from the previous
search, starting with the currently selected packet (or the most recently
selected packet, if no packet is selected).

=item Edit:Mark Packet (toggle)

Mark (or unmark if currently marked) the selected packet.  The field
"frame.marked" is set for packets that are marked, so that, for example,
a display filters can be used to display only marked packets, and so that
the L</"Edit:Find Packet"> dialog can be used to find the next or previous
marked packet.

=item Edit:Find Next Mark

=item Edit:Find Previous Mark

Find next/previous marked packet.

=item Edit:Mark All Packets

=item Edit:Unmark All Packets

Mark / Unmark all packets that are currently displayed.

=item Edit:Time Reference:Set Time Reference (toggle)

Set (or unset if currently set) the selected packet as a Time Reference packet.
When a packet is set as a Time Reference packet, the timestamps in the packet
list pane will be replaced with the string "*REF*".
The relative time timestamp in later packets will then be calculated relative
to the timestamp of this Time Reference packet and not the first packet in
the capture.

Packets that have been selected as Time Reference packets will always be
displayed in the packet list pane.  Display filters will not affect or
hide these packets.

If there is a column displayed for "Cumulative Bytes" this counter will
be reset at every Time Reference packet.

=item Edit:Time Reference:Find Next

=item Edit:Time Reference:Find Previous

Search forward / backward for a time referenced packet.

=item Edit:Configuration Profiles

Manage configuration profiles to be able to use more than one set of
preferences and configurations.

=item Edit:Preferences

Set the GUI, capture, printing and protocol options
(see L</Preferences> dialog below).

=item View:Main Toolbar

=item View:Filter Toolbar

=item View:Statusbar

Show or hide the main window controls.

=item View:Packet List

=item View:Packet Details

=item View:Packet Bytes

Show or hide the main window panes.

=item View:Time Display Format

Set the format of the packet timestamp displayed in the packet list window.

=item View:Name Resolution:Resolve Name

Try to resolve a name for the currently selected item.

=item View:Name Resolution:Enable for ... Layer

Enable or disable translation of addresses to names in the display.

=item View:Colorize Packet List

Enable or disable the coloring rules.  Disabling will improve performance.

=item View:Auto Scroll in Live Capture

Enable or disable the automatic scrolling of the
packet list while a live capture is in progress.

=item View:Zoom In

=item View:Zoom Out

Zoom into / out of the main window data (by changing the font size).

=item View:Normal Size

Reset the zoom factor of zoom in / zoom out back to normal font size.

=item View:Resize All Columns

Resize all columns to best fit the current packet display.

=item View:Expand / Collapse Subtrees

Expands / Collapses the currently selected item and it's subtrees in the packet details.

=item View:Expand All

=item View:Collapse All

Expand / Collapse all branches of the packet details.

=item View:Colorize Conversation

Select color for a conversation.

=item View:Reset Coloring 1-10

Reset Color for a conversation.

=item View:Coloring Rules

Change the foreground and background colors of the packet information in
the list of packets, based upon display filters.  The list of display
filters is applied to each packet sequentially.  After the first display
filter matches a packet, any additional display filters in the list are
ignored.  Therefore, if you are filtering on the existence of protocols,
you should list the higher-level protocols first, and the lower-level
protocols last.

=over

=item How Colorization Works

Packets are colored according to a list of color filters.  Each filter
consists of a name, a filter expression and a coloration.  A packet is
colored according to the first filter that it matches.  Color filter
expressions use exactly the same syntax as display filter expressions.

When Wireshark starts, the color filters are loaded from:

=over

=item 1.

The user's personal color filters file or, if that does not exist,

=item 2.

The global color filters file.

=back

If neither of these exist then the packets will not be colored.

=back

=item View:Show Packet In New Window

Create a new window containing a packet details view and a hex dump
window of the currently selected packet; this window will continue to
display that packet's details and data even if another packet is
selected.

=item View:Reload

Reload a capture file.  Same as I<File:Close> and I<File:Open> the same
file again.

=item Go:Back

Go back in previously visited packets history.

=item Go:Forward

Go forward in previously visited packets history.

=item Go:Go To Packet

Go to a particular numbered packet.

=item Go:Go To Corresponding Packet

If a field in the packet details pane containing a packet number is
selected, go to the packet number specified by that field.  (This works
only if the dissector that put that entry into the packet details put it
into the details as a filterable field rather than just as text.) This
can be used, for example, to go to the packet for the request
corresponding to a reply, or the reply corresponding to a request, if
that packet number has been put into the packet details.

=item Go:Previous Packet

=item Go:Next Packet

=item Go:First Packet

=item Go:Last Packet

Go to the previous / next / first / last packet in the capture.

=item Go:Previous Packet In Conversation

=item Go:Next Packet In Conversation

Go to the previous / next packet of the conversation (TCP, UDP or IP)

=item Capture:Interfaces

Shows a dialog box with all currently known interfaces and displaying the
current network traffic amount.  Capture sessions can be started from here.
Beware: keeping this box open results in high system load!

=item Capture:Options

Initiate a live packet capture (see L</"Capture Options Dialog">
below).  If no filename is specified, a temporary file will be created
to hold the capture.  The location of the file can be chosen by setting your
TMPDIR environment variable before starting B<Wireshark>.  Otherwise, the
default TMPDIR location is system-dependent, but is likely either F</var/tmp>
or F</tmp>.

=item Capture:Start

Start a live packet capture with the previously selected options.  This won't
open the options dialog box, and can be convenient for repeatedly capturing
with the same options.

=item Capture:Stop

Stop a running live capture.

=item Capture:Restart

While a live capture is running, stop it and restart with the same options
again.  This can be convenient to remove irrelevant packets, if no valuable
packets were captured so far.

=item Capture:Capture Filters

Edit the saved list of capture filters, allowing filters to be added,
changed, or deleted.

=item Analyze:Display Filters

Edit the saved list of display filters, allowing filters to be added,
changed, or deleted.

=item Analyze:Display Filter Macros

Create shortcuts for complex macros

=item Analyze:Apply as Filter

Create a display filter based on the data currently highlighted in the
packet details and apply the filter.

If that data is a field that can be tested in a display filter
expression, the display filter will test that field; otherwise, the
display filter will be based on the absolute offset within the packet.
Therefore it could be unreliable if the packet contains protocols with
variable-length headers, such as a source-routed token-ring packet.

The B<Selected> option creates a display filter that tests for a match
of the data; the B<Not Selected> option creates a display filter that
tests for a non-match of the data.  The B<And Selected>, B<Or Selected>,
B<And Not Selected>, and B<Or Not Selected> options add to the end of
the display filter in the strip at the top (or bottom) an AND or OR
operator followed by the new display filter expression.

=item Analyze:Prepare as Filter

Create a display filter based on the data currently highlighted in the
packet details.  The filter strip at the top (or bottom) is updated but
it is not yet applied.

=item Analyze:Enabled Protocols

Allow protocol dissection to be enabled or disabled for a specific
protocol.  Individual protocols can be enabled or disabled by clicking
on them in the list or by highlighting them and pressing the space bar.
The entire list can be enabled, disabled, or inverted using the buttons
below the list.

When a protocol is disabled, dissection in a particular packet stops
when that protocol is reached, and Wireshark moves on to the next packet.
Any higher-layer protocols that would otherwise have been processed will
not be displayed.  For example, disabling TCP will prevent the dissection
and display of TCP, HTTP, SMTP, Telnet, and any other protocol exclusively
dependent on TCP.

The list of protocols can be saved, so that Wireshark will start up with
the protocols in that list disabled.

=item Analyze:Decode As

If you have a packet selected, present a dialog allowing you to change
which dissectors are used to decode this packet.  The dialog has one
panel each for the link layer, network layer and transport layer
protocol/port numbers, and will allow each of these to be changed
independently.  For example, if the selected packet is a TCP packet to
port 12345, using this dialog you can instruct Wireshark to decode all
packets to or from that TCP port as HTTP packets.

=item Analyze:User Specified Decodes

Create a new window showing whether any protocol ID to dissector
mappings have been changed by the user.  This window also allows the
user to reset all decodes to their default values.

=item Analyze:Follow TCP Stream

If you have a TCP packet selected, display the contents of the data
stream for the TCP connection to which that packet belongs, as text, in
a separate window, and leave the list of packets in a filtered state,
with only those packets that are part of that TCP connection being
displayed.  You can revert to your old view by pressing ENTER in the
display filter text box, thereby invoking your old display filter (or
resetting it back to no display filter).

The window in which the data stream is displayed lets you select:

=over 8

=item *

whether to display the entire conversation, or one or the other side of
it;

=item *

whether the data being displayed is to be treated as ASCII or EBCDIC
text or as raw hex data;

=back

and lets you print what's currently being displayed, using the same
print options that are used for the I<File:Print Packet> menu item, or
save it as text to a file.

=item Analyze:Follow UDP Stream

=item Analyze:Follow TLS Stream

(Similar to Analyze:Follow TCP Stream)

=item Analyze:Expert Info

=item Analyze:Expert Info Composite

(Kind of) a log of anomalies found by Wireshark in a capture file.

=item Analyze:Conversation Filter

=item Statistics:Summary

Show summary information about the capture, including elapsed time,
packet counts, byte counts, and the like.  If a display filter is in
effect, summary information will be shown about the capture and about
the packets currently being displayed.

=item Statistics:Protocol Hierarchy

Show the number of packets, and the number of bytes in those packets,
for each protocol in the trace.  It organizes the protocols in the same
hierarchy in which they were found in the trace.  Besides counting the
packets in which the protocol exists, a count is also made for packets
in which the protocol is the last protocol in the stack.  These
last-protocol counts show you how many packets (and the byte count
associated with those packets) B<ended> in a particular protocol.  In
the table, they are listed under "End Packets" and "End Bytes".

=item Statistics:Conversations

Lists of conversations; selectable by protocol.  See Statistics:Conversation List below.

=item Statistics:End Points

List of End Point Addresses by protocol with packets/bytes/.... counts.

=item Statistics:Packet Lengths

Grouped counts of packet lengths (0-19 bytes, 20-39 bytes, ...)

=item Statistics:I/O Graphs

Open a window where up to 5 graphs in different colors can be displayed
to indicate number of packets or number of bytes per second for all packets
matching the specified filter.
By default only one graph will be displayed showing number of packets per second.

The top part of the window contains the graphs and scales for the X and
Y axis.  If the graph is too long to fit inside the window there is a
horizontal scrollbar below the drawing area that can scroll the graphs
to the left or the right.  The horizontal axis displays the time into
the capture and the vertical axis will display the measured quantity at
that time.

Below the drawing area and the scrollbar are the controls.  On the
bottom left there will be five similar sets of controls to control each
individual graph such as "Display:<button>" which button will toggle
that individual graph on/off.  If <button> is ticked, the graph will be
displayed. "Color:<color>" which is just a button to show which color
will be used to draw that graph. Finally "Filter:<filter-text>" which
can be used to specify a display filter for that particular graph.

If filter-text is empty then all packets will be used to calculate the
quantity for that graph.  If filter-text is specified only those packets
that match that display filter will be considered in the calculation of
quantity.

To the right of the 5 graph controls there are four menus to control
global aspects of the draw area and graphs.  The "Unit:" menu is used to
control what to measure; "packets/tick", "bytes/tick" or "advanced..."

packets/tick will measure the number of packets matching the (if
specified) display filter for the graph in each measurement interval.

bytes/tick will measure the total number of bytes in all packets matching
the (if specified) display filter for the graph in each measurement
interval.

advanced... see below

"Tick interval:" specifies what measurement intervals to use.  The
default is 1 second and means that the data will be counted over 1
second intervals.

"Pixels per tick:" specifies how many pixels wide each measurement
interval will be in the drawing area.  The default is 5 pixels per tick.

"Y-scale:" controls the max value for the y-axis.  Default value is
"auto" which means that B<Wireshark> will try to adjust the maxvalue
automatically.

"advanced..." If Unit:advanced...  is selected the window will display
two more controls for each of the five graphs.  One control will be a
menu where the type of calculation can be selected from
SUM,COUNT,MAX,MIN,AVG and LOAD, and one control, textbox, where the name of a
single display filter field can be specified.

The following restrictions apply to type and field combinations:

SUM: available for all types of integers and will calculate the SUM of
all occurrences of this field in the measurement interval.  Note that
some field can occur multiple times in the same packet and then all
instances will be summed up.  Example: 'tcp.len' which will count the
amount of payload data transferred across TCP in each interval.

COUNT: available for all field types.  This will COUNT the number of times
certain field occurs in each interval.  Note that some fields
may occur multiple times in each packet and if that is the case
then each instance will be counted independently and COUNT
will be greater than the number of packets.

MAX: available for all integer and relative time fields.  This will calculate
the max seen integer/time value seen for the field during the interval.
Example: 'smb.time' which will plot the maximum SMB response time.

MIN: available for all integer and relative time fields.  This will calculate
the min seen integer/time value seen for the field during the interval.
Example: 'smb.time' which will plot the minimum SMB response time.

AVG: available for all integer and relative time fields.This will
calculate the average seen integer/time value seen for the field during
the interval.  Example: 'smb.time' which will plot the average SMB
response time.

LOAD: available only for relative time fields (response times).

Example of advanced:
Display how NFS response time MAX/MIN/AVG changes over time:

Set first graph to:

   filter:nfs&&rpc.time
   Calc:MAX rpc.time

Set second graph to

   filter:nfs&&rpc.time
   Calc:AVG rpc.time

Set third graph to

   filter:nfs&&rpc.time
   Calc:MIN rpc.time

Example of advanced:
Display how the average packet size from host a.b.c.d changes over time.

Set first graph to

   filter:ip.addr==a.b.c.d&&frame.pkt_len
   Calc:AVG frame.pkt_len

LOAD:
The LOAD io-stat type is very different from anything you have ever seen
before! While the response times themselves as plotted by MIN,MAX,AVG are
indications on the Server load (which affects the Server response time),
the LOAD measurement measures the Client LOAD.
What this measures is how much workload the client generates,
i.e. how fast will the client issue new commands when the previous ones
completed.
i.e. the level of concurrency the client can maintain.
The higher the number, the more and faster is the client issuing new
commands.  When the LOAD goes down, it may be due to client load making
the client slower in issuing new commands (there may be other reasons as
well, maybe the client just doesn't have any commands it wants to issue
right then).

Load is measured in concurrency/number of overlapping i/o and the value
1000 means there is a constant load of one i/o.

In each tick interval the amount of overlap is measured.
See the graph below containing three commands:
Below the graph are the LOAD values for each interval that would be calculated.

  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
  |     |  o=====*  |     |     |     |     |     |
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
  |  o========*     | o============*  |     |     |
  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
  --------------------------------------------------> Time
   500   1500   500  750   1000   500    0     0

=item Statistics:Conversation List

This option will open a new window that displays a list of all
conversations between two endpoints.  The list has one row for each
unique conversation and displays total number of packets/bytes seen as
well as number of packets/bytes in each direction.

By default the list is sorted according to the number of packets but by
clicking on the column header; it is possible to re-sort the list in
ascending or descending order by any column.

By first selecting a conversation by clicking on it and then using the
right mouse button (on those platforms that have a right
mouse button) Wireshark will display a popup menu offering several different
filter operations to apply to the capture.

These statistics windows can also be invoked from the Wireshark command
line using the B<-z conv> argument.

=item Statistics:Service Response Time

=over 4

=item *

AFP

=item *

CAMEL

=item *

DCE-RPC

Open a window to display Service Response Time statistics for an
arbitrary DCE-RPC program
interface and display B<Procedure>, B<Number of Calls>, B<Minimum SRT>,
B<Maximum SRT> and B<Average SRT> for all procedures for that
program/version.  These windows opened will update in semi-real time to
reflect changes when doing live captures or when reading new capture
files into B<Wireshark>.

This dialog will also allow an optional filter string to be used.
If an optional filter string is used only such DCE-RPC request/response pairs
that match that filter will be used to calculate the statistics.  If no filter
string is specified all request/response pairs will be used.

=item *

Diameter

=item *

Fibre Channel

Open a window to display Service Response Time statistics for Fibre Channel
and display B<FC Type>, B<Number of Calls>, B<Minimum SRT>,
B<Maximum SRT> and B<Average SRT> for all FC types.
These windows opened will update in semi-real time to
reflect changes when doing live captures or when reading new capture
files into B<Wireshark>.
The Service Response Time is calculated as the time delta between the
First packet of the exchange and the Last packet of the exchange.

This dialog will also allow an optional filter string to be used.
If an optional filter string is used only such FC first/last exchange pairs
that match that filter will be used to calculate the statistics.  If no filter
string is specified all request/response pairs will be used.

=item *

GTP

=item *

H.225 RAS

Collect requests/response SRT (Service Response Time) data for ITU-T H.225 RAS.
Data collected is B<number of calls> for each known ITU-T H.225 RAS Message Type,
B<Minimum SRT>, B<Maximum SRT>, B<Average SRT>, B<Minimum in Packet>, and B<Maximum in Packet>.
You will also get the number of B<Open Requests> (Unresponded Requests),
B<Discarded Responses> (Responses without matching request) and Duplicate Messages.
These windows opened will update in semi-real time to reflect changes when
doing live captures or when reading new capture files into B<Wireshark>.

You can apply an optional filter string in a dialog box, before starting
the calculation.  The statistics will only be calculated
on those calls matching that filter.

=item *

LDAP

=item *

MEGACO

=item *

MGCP

Collect requests/response SRT (Service Response Time) data for MGCP.
Data collected is B<number of calls> for each known MGCP Type,
B<Minimum SRT>, B<Maximum SRT>, B<Average SRT>, B<Minimum in Packet>, and B<Maximum in Packet>.
These windows opened will update in semi-real time to reflect changes when
doing live captures or when reading new capture files into B<Wireshark>.

You can apply an optional filter string in a dialog box, before starting
the calculation.  The statistics will only be calculated
on those calls matching that filter.

=item *

NCP

=item *

ONC-RPC

Open a window to display statistics for an arbitrary ONC-RPC program interface
and display B<Procedure>, B<Number of Calls>, B<Minimum SRT>, B<Maximum SRT> and B<Average SRT> for all procedures for that program/version.
These windows opened will update in semi-real time to reflect changes when
doing live captures or when reading new capture files into B<Wireshark>.

This dialog will also allow an optional filter string to be used.
If an optional filter string is used only such ONC-RPC request/response pairs
that match that filter will be used to calculate the statistics.  If no filter
string is specified all request/response pairs will be used.

By first selecting a conversation by clicking on it and then using the
right mouse button (on those platforms that have a right
mouse button) Wireshark will display a popup menu offering several different
filter operations to apply to the capture.

=item *

RADIUS

=item *

SCSI

=item *

SMB

Collect call/reply SRT (Service Response Time) data for SMB.  Data collected
is the number of calls for each SMB command, MinSRT, MaxSRT and AvgSRT.

The data will be presented as separate tables for all normal SMB commands,
all Transaction2 commands and all NT Transaction commands.
Only those commands that are seen in the capture will have its stats
displayed.
Only the first command in a xAndX command chain will be used in the
calculation.  So for common SessionSetupAndX + TreeConnectAndX chains,
only the SessionSetupAndX call will be used in the statistics.
This is a flaw that might be fixed in the future.

You can apply an optional filter string in a dialog box, before starting
the calculation.  The stats will only be calculated
on those calls matching that filter.

By first selecting a conversation by clicking on it and then using the
right mouse button (on those platforms that have a right
mouse button) Wireshark will display a popup menu offering several different
filter operations to apply to the capture.

=item *

SMB2

=back

=item Statistics:BOOTP-DHCP



=item Statistics:Compare

Compare two Capture Files

=item Statistics:Flow Graph

Flow Graph: General/TCP

=item Statistics:HTTP

HTTP Load Distribution, Packet Counter & Requests

=item Statistics:IP Addresses

Count/Rate/Percent by IP Address

=item Statistics:IP Destinations

Count/Rate/Percent by IP Address/protocol/port

=item Statistics:IP Protocol Types

Count/Rate/Percent by IP Protocol Types

=item Statistics:ONC-RPC Programs

This dialog will open a window showing aggregated SRT statistics for all
ONC-RPC Programs/versions that exist in the capture file.

=item Statistics:TCP Stream Graph

Graphs: Round Trip; Throughput; Time-Sequence (Stevens); Time-Sequence (tcptrace)

=item Statistics:UDP Multicast streams

Multicast Streams Counts/Rates/... by Source/Destination Address/Port pairs

=item Statistics:WLAN Traffic

WLAN Traffic Statistics

=item Telephony:ITU-T H.225

Count ITU-T H.225 messages and their reasons.  In the first column you get a
list of H.225 messages and H.225 message reasons, which occur in the current
capture file.  The number of occurrences of each message or reason will be displayed
in the second column.
This window opened will update in semi-real time to reflect changes when
doing live captures or when reading new capture files into B<Wireshark>.

You can apply an optional filter string in a dialog box, before starting
the counter.  The statistics will only be calculated
on those calls matching that filter.

=item Telephony:SIP

Activate a counter for SIP messages.  You will get the number of occurrences of each
SIP Method and of each SIP Status-Code.  Additionally you also get the number of
resent SIP Messages (only for SIP over UDP).

This window opened will update in semi-real time to reflect changes when
doing live captures or when reading new capture files into B<Wireshark>.

You can apply an optional filter string in a dialog box, before starting
the counter.  The statistics will only be calculated
on those calls matching that filter.

=item Tools:Firewall ACL Rules



=item Help:Contents

Some help texts.

=item Help:Supported Protocols

List of supported protocols and display filter protocol fields.

=item Help:Manual Pages

Display locally installed HTML versions of these manual pages in a web browser.

=item Help:Wireshark Online

Various links to online resources to be open in a web browser, like
L<https://www.wireshark.org>.

=item Help:About Wireshark

See various information about Wireshark (see L</About> dialog below), like the
version, the folders used, the available plugins, ...

=back

=head2 WINDOWS

=over 4

=item Main Window

The main window contains the usual things like the menu, some toolbars, the
main area and a statusbar.  The main area is split into three panes, you can
resize each pane using a "thumb" at the right end of each divider line.

The main window is much more flexible than before.  The layout of the main
window can be customized by the I<Layout> page in the dialog box popped
up by I<Edit:Preferences>, the following will describe the layout with the
default settings.

=over 6

=item Main Toolbar

Some menu items are available for quick access here.  There is no way to
customize the items in the toolbar, however the toolbar can be hidden by
I<View:Main Toolbar>.

=item Filter Toolbar

A display filter can be entered into the filter toolbar.
A filter for HTTP, HTTPS, and DNS traffic might look like this:

  tcp.port in {80 443 53}

Selecting the I<Filter:> button lets you choose from a list of named
filters that you can optionally save.  Pressing the Return or Enter
keys, or selecting the I<Apply> button, will cause the filter to be
applied to the current list of packets.  Selecting the I<Reset> button
clears the display filter so that all packets are displayed (again).

There is no way to customize the items in the toolbar, however the toolbar
can be hidden by I<View:Filter Toolbar>.

=item Packet List Pane

The top pane contains the list of network packets that you can scroll
through and select.  By default, the packet number, packet timestamp,
source and destination addresses, protocol, and description are
displayed for each packet; the I<Columns> page in the dialog box popped
up by I<Edit:Preferences> lets you change this (although, unfortunately,
you currently have to save the preferences, and exit and restart
Wireshark, for those changes to take effect).

If you click on the heading for a column, the display will be sorted by
that column; clicking on the heading again will reverse the sort order
for that column.

An effort is made to display information as high up the protocol stack
as possible, e.g. IP addresses are displayed for IP packets, but the
MAC layer address is displayed for unknown packet types.

The right mouse button can be used to pop up a menu of operations.

The middle mouse button can be used to mark a packet.

=item Packet Details Pane

The middle pane contains a display of the details of the
currently-selected packet.  The display shows each field and its value
in each protocol header in the stack.  The right mouse button can be
used to pop up a menu of operations.

=item Packet Bytes Pane

The lowest pane contains a hex and ASCII dump of the actual packet data.
Selecting a field in the packet details highlights the corresponding
bytes in this section.

The right mouse button can be used to pop up a menu of operations.

=item Statusbar

The statusbar is divided into three parts, on the left some context dependent
things are shown, like information about the loaded file, in the center the
number of packets are displayed, and on the right the current configuration
profile.

The statusbar can be hidden by I<View:Statusbar>.

=back

=item Preferences

The I<Preferences> dialog lets you control various personal preferences
for the behavior of B<Wireshark>.

=over 6

=item User Interface Preferences

The I<User Interface> page is used to modify small aspects of the GUI to
your own personal taste:

=over 6

=item Selection Bars

The selection bar in the packet list and packet details can have either
a "browse" or "select" behavior.  If the selection bar has a "browse"
behavior, the arrow keys will move an outline of the selection bar,
allowing you to browse the rest of the list or details without changing
the selection until you press the space bar.  If the selection bar has a
"select" behavior, the arrow keys will move the selection bar and change
the selection to the new item in the packet list or packet details.

=item Save Window Position

If this item is selected, the position of the main Wireshark window will
be saved when Wireshark exits, and used when Wireshark is started again.

=item Save Window Size

If this item is selected, the size of the main Wireshark window will
be saved when Wireshark exits, and used when Wireshark is started again.

=item Save Window Maximized state

If this item is selected the maximize state of the main Wireshark window
will be saved when Wireshark exists, and used when Wireshark is started again.

=item File Open Dialog Behavior

This item allows the user to select how Wireshark handles the listing
of the "File Open" Dialog when opening trace files.  "Remember Last
Directory" causes Wireshark to automatically position the dialog in the
directory of the most recently opened file, even between launches of Wireshark.
"Always Open in Directory" allows the user to define a persistent directory
that the dialog will always default to.

=item Directory

Allows the user to specify a persistent File Open directory.  Trailing
slashes or backslashes will automatically be added.

=item File Open Preview timeout

This items allows the user to define how much time is spend reading the
capture file to present preview data in the File Open dialog.

=item Open Recent maximum list entries

The File menu supports a recent file list.  This items allows the user to
specify how many files are kept track of in this list.

=item Ask for unsaved capture files

When closing a capture file or Wireshark itself if the file isn't saved yet
the user is presented the option to save the file when this item is set.

=item Wrap during find

This items determines the behavior when reaching the beginning or the end
of a capture file.  When set the search wraps around and continues, otherwise
it stops.

=item Settings dialogs show a save button

This item determines if the various dialogs sport an explicit Save button
or that save is implicit in OK / Apply.

=item Web browser command

This entry specifies the command line to launch a web browser.  It is used
to access online content, like the Wiki and user guide.  Use '%s' to place
the request URL in the command line.

=back

=item Layout Preferences

The I<Layout> page lets you specify the general layout of the main window.
You can choose from six different layouts and fill the three panes with the
contents you like.

=over 6

=item Scrollbars

The vertical scrollbars in the three panes can be set to be either on
the left or the right.

=item Alternating row colors

=item Hex Display

The highlight method in the hex dump display for the selected protocol
item can be set to use either inverse video, or bold characters.

=item Toolbar style

=item Filter toolbar placement

=item Custom window title

=back

=item Column Preferences

The I<Columns> page lets you specify the number, title, and format
of each column in the packet list.

The I<Column title> entry is used to specify the title of the column
displayed at the top of the packet list.  The type of data that the column
displays can be specified using the I<Column format> option menu.
The row of buttons on the left perform the following actions:

=over 6

=item New

Adds a new column to the list.

=item Delete

Deletes the currently selected list item.

=item Up / Down

Moves the selected list item up or down one position.

=back

=item Font Preferences

The I<Font> page lets you select the font to be used for most text.

=item Color Preferences

The I<Colors> page can be used to change the color of the text
displayed in the TCP stream window and for marked packets.  To change a color,
simply select an attribute from the "Set:" menu and use the color selector to
get the desired color.  The new text colors are displayed as a sample text.

=item Capture Preferences

The I<Capture> page lets you specify various parameters for capturing
live packet data; these are used the first time a capture is started.

The I<Interface:> combo box lets you specify the interface from which to
capture packet data, or the name of a FIFO from which to get the packet
data.

The I<Data link type:> option menu lets you, for some interfaces, select
the data link header you want to see on the packets you capture.  For
example, in some OSes and with some versions of libpcap, you can choose,
on an 802.11 interface, whether the packets should appear as Ethernet
packets (with a fake Ethernet header) or as 802.11 packets.

The I<Limit each packet to ... bytes> check box lets you set the
snapshot length to use when capturing live data; turn on the check box,
and then set the number of bytes to use as the snapshot length.

The I<Filter:> text entry lets you set a capture filter expression to be
used when capturing.

If any of the environment variables SSH_CONNECTION, SSH_CLIENT,
REMOTEHOST, DISPLAY, or SESSIONNAME are set, Wireshark will create a
default capture filter that excludes traffic from the hosts and ports
defined in those variables.

The I<Capture packets in promiscuous mode> check box lets you specify
whether to put the interface in promiscuous mode when capturing.

The I<Update list of packets in real time> check box lets you specify
that the display should be updated as packets are seen.

The I<Automatic scrolling in live capture> check box lets you specify
whether, in an "Update list of packets in real time" capture, the packet
list pane should automatically scroll to show the most recently captured
packets.

=item Printing Preferences

The radio buttons at the top of the I<Printing> page allow you choose
between printing packets with the I<File:Print Packet> menu item as text
or PostScript, and sending the output directly to a command or saving it
to a file.  The I<Command:> text entry box, on UNIX-compatible systems,
is the command to send files to (usually B<lpr>), and the I<File:> entry
box lets you enter the name of the file you wish to save to.
Additionally, you can select the I<File:> button to browse the file
system for a particular save file.

=item Name Resolution Preferences

The I<Enable MAC name resolution>, I<Enable network name resolution> and
I<Enable transport name resolution> check boxes let you specify whether
MAC addresses, network addresses, and transport-layer port numbers
should be translated to names.

The I<Enable concurrent DNS name resolution> allows Wireshark to send out
multiple name resolution requests and not wait for the result before
continuing dissection.  This speeds up dissection with network name
resolution but initially may miss resolutions.  The number of concurrent
requests can be set here as well.

I<SMI paths>

I<SMI modules>

=item RTP Player Preferences

This page allows you to select the number of channels visible in the
RTP player window.  It determines the height of the window, more channels
are possible and visible by means of a scroll bar.

=item Protocol Preferences

There are also pages for various protocols that Wireshark dissects,
controlling the way Wireshark handles those protocols.

=back

=item Edit Capture Filter List

=item Edit Display Filter List

=item Capture Filter

=item Display Filter

=item Read Filter

=item Search Filter

The I<Edit Capture Filter List> dialog lets you create, modify, and
delete capture filters, and the I<Edit Display Filter List> dialog lets
you create, modify, and delete display filters.

The I<Capture Filter> dialog lets you do all of the editing operations
listed, and also lets you choose or construct a filter to be used when
capturing packets.

The I<Display Filter> dialog lets you do all of the editing operations
listed, and also lets you choose or construct a filter to be used to
filter the current capture being viewed.

The I<Read Filter> dialog lets you do all of the editing operations
listed, and also lets you choose or construct a filter to be used to
as a read filter for a capture file you open.

The I<Search Filter> dialog lets you do all of the editing operations
listed, and also lets you choose or construct a filter expression to be
used in a find operation.

In all of those dialogs, the I<Filter name> entry specifies a
descriptive name for a filter, e.g.  B<Web and DNS traffic>.  The
I<Filter string> entry is the text that actually describes the filtering
action to take, as described above.The dialog buttons perform the
following actions:

=over 6

=item New

If there is text in the two entry boxes, creates a new associated list
item.

=item Edit

Modifies the currently selected list item to match what's in the entry
boxes.

=item Delete

Deletes the currently selected list item.

=item Add Expression...

For display filter expressions, pops up a dialog box to allow you to
construct a filter expression to test a particular field; it offers
lists of field names, and, when appropriate, lists from which to select
tests to perform on the field and values with which to compare it.  In
that dialog box, the OK button will cause the filter expression you
constructed to be entered into the I<Filter string> entry at the current
cursor position.

=item OK

In the I<Capture Filter> dialog, closes the dialog box and makes the
filter in the I<Filter string> entry the filter in the I<Capture
Preferences> dialog.  In the I<Display Filter> dialog, closes the dialog
box and makes the filter in the I<Filter string> entry the current
display filter, and applies it to the current capture.  In the I<Read
Filter> dialog, closes the dialog box and makes the filter in the
I<Filter string> entry the filter in the I<Open Capture File> dialog.
In the I<Search Filter> dialog, closes the dialog box and makes the
filter in the I<Filter string> entry the filter in the I<Find Packet>
dialog.

=item Apply

Makes the filter in the I<Filter string> entry the current display
filter, and applies it to the current capture.

=item Save

If the list of filters being edited is the list of
capture filters, saves the current filter list to the personal capture
filters file, and if the list of filters being edited is the list of
display filters, saves the current filter list to the personal display
filters file.

=item Close

Closes the dialog without doing anything with the filter in the I<Filter
string> entry.

=back

=item The Color Filters Dialog

This dialog displays a list of color filters and allows it to be
modified.

=over

=item THE FILTER LIST

Single rows may be selected by clicking.  Multiple rows may be selected
by using the ctrl and shift keys in combination with the mouse button.

=item NEW

Adds a new filter at the bottom of the list and opens the Edit Color
Filter dialog box.  You will have to alter the filter expression at
least before the filter will be accepted.  The format of color filter
expressions is identical to that of display filters.  The new filter is
selected, so it may immediately be moved up and down, deleted or edited.
To avoid confusion all filters are unselected before the new filter is
created.

=item EDIT

Opens the Edit Color Filter dialog box for the selected filter. (If this
button is disabled you may have more than one filter selected, making it
ambiguous which is to be edited.)

=item ENABLE

Enables the selected color filter(s).

=item DISABLE

Disables the selected color filter(s).

=item DELETE

Deletes the selected color filter(s).

=item EXPORT

Allows you to choose a file in which to save the current list of color
filters.  You may also choose to save only the selected filters.  A
button is provided to save the filters in the global color filters file
(you must have sufficient permissions to write this file, of course).

=item IMPORT

Allows you to choose a file containing color filters which are then
added to the bottom of the current list.  All the added filters are
selected, so they may be moved to the correct position in the list as a
group.  To avoid confusion, all filters are unselected before the new
filters are imported.  A button is provided to load the filters from the
global color filters file.

=item CLEAR

Deletes your personal color filters file, reloads the global
color filters file, if any, and closes the dialog.

=item UP

Moves the selected filter(s) up the list, making it more likely that
they will be used to color packets.

=item DOWN

Moves the selected filter(s) down the list, making it less likely that
they will be used to color packets.

=item OK

Closes the dialog and uses the color filters as they stand.

=item APPLY

Colors the packets according to the current list of color filters, but
does not close the dialog.

=item SAVE

Saves the current list of color filters in your personal color filters
file.  Unless you do this they will not be used the next time you start
Wireshark.

=item CLOSE

Closes the dialog without changing the coloration of the packets.  Note
that changes you have made to the current list of color filters are not
undone.

=back

=item Capture Options Dialog

The I<Capture Options Dialog> lets you specify various parameters for
capturing live packet data.

The I<Interface:> field lets you specify the interface from which to
capture packet data or a command from which to get the packet data via a
pipe.

The I<Link layer header type:> field lets you specify the interfaces link
layer header type.  This field is usually disabled, as most interface have
only one header type.

The I<Capture packets in promiscuous mode> check box lets you specify
whether the interface should be put into promiscuous mode when
capturing.

The I<Limit each packet to ... bytes> check box and field lets you
specify a maximum number of bytes per packet to capture and save; if the
check box is not checked, the limit will be 262144 bytes.

The I<Capture Filter:> entry lets you specify the capture filter using a
tcpdump-style filter string as described above.

The I<File:> entry lets you specify the file into which captured packets
should be saved, as in the I<Printer Options> dialog above.  If not
specified, the captured packets will be saved in a temporary file; you
can save those packets to a file with the I<File:Save As> menu item.

The I<Use multiple files> check box lets you specify that the capture
should be done in "multiple files" mode.  This option is disabled, if the
I<Update list of packets in real time> option is checked.

The I<Next file every ...  megabyte(s)> check box and fields lets
you specify that a switch to a next file should be done
if the specified filesize is reached.  You can also select the appropriate
unit, but beware that the filesize has a maximum of 2 GiB.
The check box is forced to be checked, as "multiple files" mode requires a
file size to be specified.

The I<Next file every ... minute(s)> check box and fields lets
you specify that the switch to a next file should be done after the specified
time has elapsed, even if the specified capture size is not reached.

The I<Ring buffer with ... files> field lets you specify the number
of files of a ring buffer.  This feature will capture into the first file
again, after the specified number of files have been used.

The I<Stop capture after ... files> field lets you specify the number
of capture files used, until the capture is stopped.

The I<Stop capture after ... packet(s)> check box and field let
you specify that Wireshark should stop capturing after having captured
some number of packets; if the check box is not checked, Wireshark will
not stop capturing at some fixed number of captured packets.

The I<Stop capture after ... megabyte(s)> check box and field lets
you specify that Wireshark should stop capturing after the file to which
captured packets are being saved grows as large as or larger than some
specified number of megabytes.  If the check box is not checked, Wireshark
will not stop capturing at some capture file size (although the operating
system on which Wireshark is running, or the available disk space, may still
limit the maximum size of a capture file).  This option is disabled, if
"multiple files" mode is used,

The I<Stop capture after ...  second(s)> check box and field let you
specify that Wireshark should stop capturing after it has been capturing
for some number of seconds; if the check box is not checked, Wireshark
will not stop capturing after some fixed time has elapsed.

The I<Update list of packets in real time> check box lets you specify
whether the display should be updated as packets are captured and, if
you specify that, the I<Automatic scrolling in live capture> check box
lets you specify the packet list pane should automatically scroll to
show the most recently captured packets as new packets arrive.

The I<Enable MAC name resolution>, I<Enable network name resolution> and
I<Enable transport name resolution> check boxes let you specify whether
MAC addresses, network addresses, and transport-layer port numbers
should be translated to names.

=item About

The I<About> dialog lets you view various information about Wireshark.

=item About:Wireshark

The I<Wireshark> page lets you view general information about Wireshark,
like the installed version, licensing information and such.

=item About:Authors

The I<Authors> page shows the author and all contributors.

=item About:Folders

The I<Folders> page lets you view the directory names where Wireshark is
searching it's various configuration and other files.

=item About:Plugins

The I<Plugins> page lets you view the dissector plugin modules
available on your system.

The I<Plugins List> shows the name and version of each dissector plugin
module found on your system.

On Unix-compatible systems, the plugins are looked for in the following
directories: the F<lib/wireshark/plugins/$VERSION> directory under the
main installation directory (for example,
F</usr/local/lib/wireshark/plugins/$VERSION>), and then
F<$HOME/.wireshark/plugins>.

On Windows systems, the plugins are looked for in the following
directories: F<plugins\$VERSION> directory under the main installation
directory (for example, F<C:\Program Files\Wireshark\plugins\$VERSION>),
and then F<%APPDATA%\Wireshark\plugins\$VERSION> (or, if %APPDATA% isn't
defined, F<%USERPROFILE%\Application Data\Wireshark\plugins\$VERSION>).

$VERSION is the version number of the plugin interface, which
is typically the version number of Wireshark.  Note that a dissector
plugin module may support more than one protocol; there is not
necessarily a one-to-one correspondence between dissector plugin modules
and protocols.  Protocols supported by a dissector plugin module are
enabled and disabled using the I<Edit:Protocols> dialog box, just as
protocols built into Wireshark are.

=back

=head1 CAPTURE FILTER SYNTAX

See the manual page of pcap-filter(7) or, if that doesn't exist, tcpdump(8),
or, if that doesn't exist, L<https://gitlab.com/wireshark/wireshark/-/wikis/CaptureFilters>.

=head1 DISPLAY FILTER SYNTAX

For a complete table of protocol and protocol fields that are filterable
in B<Wireshark> see the wireshark-filter(4) manual page.

=head1 FILES

These files contains various B<Wireshark> configuration settings.

=over 4

=item Preferences

The F<preferences> files contain global (system-wide) and personal
preference settings.  If the system-wide preference file exists, it is
read first, overriding the default settings.  If the personal preferences
file exists, it is read next, overriding any previous values.  Note: If
the command line flag B<-o> is used (possibly more than once), it will
in turn override values from the preferences files.

The preferences settings are in the form I<prefname>B<:>I<value>,
one per line,
where I<prefname> is the name of the preference
and I<value> is the value to
which it should be set; white space is allowed between B<:> and
I<value>.  A preference setting can be continued on subsequent lines by
indenting the continuation lines with white space.  A B<#> character
starts a comment that runs to the end of the line:

  # Vertical scrollbars should be on right side?
  # TRUE or FALSE (case-insensitive).
  gui.scrollbar_on_right: TRUE

The global preferences file is looked for in the F<wireshark> directory
under the F<share> subdirectory of the main installation directory (for
example, F</usr/local/share/wireshark/preferences>) on UNIX-compatible
systems, and in the main installation directory (for example,
F<C:\Program Files\Wireshark\preferences>) on Windows systems.

The personal preferences file is looked for in
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/wireshark/preferences>
(or, if F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/wireshark> does not exist while F<$HOME/.wireshark>
is present, F<$HOME/.wireshark/preferences>) on
UNIX-compatible systems and F<%APPDATA%\Wireshark\preferences> (or, if
%APPDATA% isn't defined, F<%USERPROFILE%\Application
Data\Wireshark\preferences>) on Windows systems.

Note: Whenever the preferences are saved by using the I<Save> button
in the I<Edit:Preferences> dialog box, your personal preferences file
will be overwritten with the new settings, destroying any comments and
unknown/obsolete settings that were in the file.

=item Recent

The F<recent> file contains personal settings (mostly GUI related) such
as the current B<Wireshark> window size.  The file is saved at program exit and
read in at program start automatically.  Note: The command line flag B<-o>
may be used to override settings from this file.

The settings in this file have the same format as in the F<preferences>
files, and the same directory as for the personal preferences file is
used.

Note: Whenever Wireshark is closed, your recent file
will be overwritten with the new settings, destroying any comments and
unknown/obsolete settings that were in the file.

=item Disabled (Enabled) Protocols

The F<disabled_protos> files contain system-wide and personal lists of
protocols that have been disabled, so that their dissectors are never
called.  The files contain protocol names, one per line, where the
protocol name is the same name that would be used in a display filter
for the protocol:

  http
  tcp     # a comment

If a protocol is listed in the global F<disabled_protos> file, it is not
displayed in the I<Analyze:Enabled Protocols> dialog box, and so cannot
be enabled by the user.

The global F<disabled_protos> file uses the same directory as the global
preferences file.

The personal F<disabled_protos> file uses the same directory as the
personal preferences file.

Note: Whenever the disabled protocols list is saved by using the I<Save>
button in the I<Analyze:Enabled Protocols> dialog box, your personal
disabled protocols file will be overwritten with the new settings,
destroying any comments that were in the file.

=item Name Resolution (hosts)

If the personal F<hosts> file exists, it is
used to resolve IPv4 and IPv6 addresses before any other
attempts are made to resolve them.  The file has the standard F<hosts>
file syntax; each line contains one IP address and name, separated by
whitespace.  The same directory as for the personal preferences file is used.

Capture filter name resolution is handled by libpcap on UNIX-compatible
systems and WinPcap on Windows.  As such the Wireshark personal F<hosts> file
will not be consulted for capture filter name resolution.

=item Name Resolution (subnets)

If an IPv4 address cannot be translated via name resolution (no exact
match is found) then a partial match is attempted via the F<subnets> file.
Both the global F<subnets> file and personal F<subnets> files are used
if they exist.

Each line of this file consists of an IPv4 address, a subnet mask length
separated only by a / and a name separated by whitespace. While the address
must be a full IPv4 address, any values beyond the mask length are subsequently
ignored.

An example is:

# Comments must be prepended by the # sign!
192.168.0.0/24 ws_test_network

A partially matched name will be printed as "subnet-name.remaining-address".
For example, "192.168.0.1" under the subnet above would be printed as
"ws_test_network.1"; if the mask length above had been 16 rather than 24, the
printed address would be ``ws_test_network.0.1".

=item Name Resolution (ethers)

The F<ethers> files are consulted to correlate 6-byte hardware addresses to
names.  First the personal F<ethers> file is tried and if an address is not
found there the global F<ethers> file is tried next.

Each line contains one hardware address and name, separated by
whitespace.  The digits of the hardware address are separated by colons
(:), dashes (-) or periods (.).  The same separator character must be
used consistently in an address.  The following three lines are valid
lines of an F<ethers> file:

  ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff          Broadcast
  c0-00-ff-ff-ff-ff          TR_broadcast
  00.00.00.00.00.00          Zero_broadcast

The global F<ethers> file is looked for in the F</etc> directory on
UNIX-compatible systems, and in the main installation directory (for
example, F<C:\Program Files\Wireshark>) on Windows systems.

The personal F<ethers> file is looked for in the same directory as the personal
preferences file.

Capture filter name resolution is handled by libpcap on UNIX-compatible
systems and WinPcap on Windows.  As such the Wireshark personal F<ethers> file
will not be consulted for capture filter name resolution.

=item Name Resolution (manuf)

The F<manuf> file is used to match the 3-byte vendor portion of a 6-byte
hardware address with the manufacturer's name; it can also contain well-known
MAC addresses and address ranges specified with a netmask.  The format of the
file is the same as the F<ethers> files, except that entries such as:

  00:00:0C      Cisco

can be provided, with the 3-byte OUI and the name for a vendor, and
entries such as:

  00-00-0C-07-AC/40     All-HSRP-routers

can be specified, with a MAC address and a mask indicating how many bits
of the address must match.  The above entry, for example, has 40
significant bits, or 5 bytes, and would match addresses from
00-00-0C-07-AC-00 through 00-00-0C-07-AC-FF.  The mask need not be a
multiple of 8.

The F<manuf> file is looked for in the same directory as the global
preferences file.

=item Name Resolution (services)

The F<services> file is used to translate port numbers into names.
Both the global F<services> file and personal F<services> files are used
if they exist.

The file has the standard F<services> file syntax; each line contains one
(service) name and one transport identifier separated by white space.  The
transport identifier includes one port number and one transport protocol name
(typically tcp, udp, or sctp) separated by a /.

An example is:

mydns       5045/udp     # My own Domain Name Server
mydns       5045/tcp     # My own Domain Name Server

=item Name Resolution (ipxnets)

The F<ipxnets> files are used to correlate 4-byte IPX network numbers to
names.  First the global F<ipxnets> file is tried and if that address is not
found there the personal one is tried next.

The format is the same as the F<ethers>
file, except that each address is four bytes instead of six.
Additionally, the address can be represented as a single hexadecimal
number, as is more common in the IPX world, rather than four hex octets.
For example, these four lines are valid lines of an F<ipxnets> file:

  C0.A8.2C.00              HR
  c0-a8-1c-00              CEO
  00:00:BE:EF              IT_Server1
  110f                     FileServer3

The global F<ipxnets> file is looked for in the F</etc> directory on
UNIX-compatible systems, and in the main installation directory (for
example, F<C:\Program Files\Wireshark>) on Windows systems.

The personal F<ipxnets> file is looked for in the same directory as the
personal preferences file.

=item Capture Filters

The F<cfilters> files contain system-wide and personal capture filters.
Each line contains one filter, starting with the string displayed in the
dialog box in quotation marks, followed by the filter string itself:

  "HTTP" port 80
  "DCERPC" port 135

The global F<cfilters> file uses the same directory as the
global preferences file.

The personal F<cfilters> file uses the same directory as the personal
preferences file.  It is written through the Capture:Capture Filters
dialog.

If the global F<cfilters> file exists, it is used only if the personal
F<cfilters> file does not exist; global and personal capture filters are
not merged.

=item Display Filters

The F<dfilters> files contain system-wide and personal display filters.
Each line contains one filter, starting with the string displayed in the
dialog box in quotation marks, followed by the filter string itself:

  "HTTP" http
  "DCERPC" dcerpc

The global F<dfilters> file uses the same directory as the
global preferences file.

The personal F<dfilters> file uses the same directory as the
personal preferences file.  It is written through the Analyze:Display
Filters dialog.

If the global F<dfilters> file exists, it is used only if the personal
F<dfilters> file does not exist; global and personal display filters are
not merged.

=item Color Filters (Coloring Rules)

The F<colorfilters> files contain system-wide and personal color filters.
Each line contains one filter, starting with the string displayed in the
dialog box, followed by the corresponding display filter.  Then the
background and foreground colors are appended:

  # a comment
  @tcp@tcp@[59345,58980,65534][0,0,0]
  @udp@udp@[28834,57427,65533][0,0,0]

The global F<colorfilters> file uses the same directory as the
global preferences file.

The personal F<colorfilters> file uses the same directory as the
personal preferences file.  It is written through the View:Coloring Rules
dialog.

If the global F<colorfilters> file exists, it is used only if the personal
F<colorfilters> file does not exist; global and personal color filters are
not merged.

=item Plugins

See above in the description of the About:Plugins page.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

=over 4

=item WIRESHARK_CONFIG_DIR

This environment variable overrides the location of personal configuration
files. It defaults to F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/wireshark> (or F<$HOME/.wireshark> if
the former is missing while the latter exists). On Windows,
F<%APPDATA%\Wireshark> is used instead. Available since Wireshark 3.0.

=item WIRESHARK_DEBUG_WMEM_OVERRIDE

Setting this environment variable forces the wmem framework to use the
specified allocator backend for *all* allocations, regardless of which
backend is normally specified by the code. This is mainly useful to developers
when testing or debugging. See I<README.wmem> in the source distribution for
details.

=item WIRESHARK_RUN_FROM_BUILD_DIRECTORY

This environment variable causes the plugins and other data files to be loaded
from the build directory (where the program was compiled) rather than from the
standard locations.  It has no effect when the program in question is running
with root (or setuid) permissions on *NIX.

=item WIRESHARK_DATA_DIR

This environment variable causes the various data files to be loaded from
a directory other than the standard locations.  It has no effect when the
program in question is running with root (or setuid) permissions on *NIX.

=item ERF_RECORDS_TO_CHECK

This environment variable controls the number of ERF records checked when
deciding if a file really is in the ERF format.  Setting this environment
variable a number higher than the default (20) would make false positives
less likely.

=item IPFIX_RECORDS_TO_CHECK

This environment variable controls the number of IPFIX records checked when
deciding if a file really is in the IPFIX format.  Setting this environment
variable a number higher than the default (20) would make false positives
less likely.

=item WIRESHARK_ABORT_ON_DISSECTOR_BUG

If this environment variable is set, B<Wireshark> will call abort(3)
when a dissector bug is encountered.  abort(3) will cause the program to
exit abnormally; if you are running B<Wireshark> in a debugger, it
should halt in the debugger and allow inspection of the process, and, if
you are not running it in a debugger, it will, on some OSes, assuming
your environment is configured correctly, generate a core dump file.
This can be useful to developers attempting to troubleshoot a problem
with a protocol dissector.

=item WIRESHARK_ABORT_ON_TOO_MANY_ITEMS

If this environment variable is set, B<Wireshark> will call abort(3)
if a dissector tries to add too many items to a tree (generally this
is an indication of the dissector not breaking out of a loop soon enough).
abort(3) will cause the program to exit abnormally; if you are running
B<Wireshark> in a debugger, it should halt in the debugger and allow
inspection of the process, and, if you are not running it in a debugger,
it will, on some OSes, assuming your environment is configured correctly,
generate a core dump file.  This can be useful to developers attempting to
troubleshoot a problem with a protocol dissector.

=item WIRESHARK_QUIT_AFTER_CAPTURE

Cause B<Wireshark> to exit after the end of the capture session.  This
doesn't automatically start a capture; you must still use B<-k> to do
that.  You must also specify an autostop condition, e.g.  B<-c> or B<-a
duration:...>.  This means that you will not be able to see the results
of the capture after it stops; it's primarily useful for testing.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

wireshark-filter(4), tshark(1), editcap(1), pcap(3), dumpcap(1), mergecap(1),
text2pcap(1), pcap-filter(7) or tcpdump(8)

=head1 NOTES

The latest version of B<Wireshark> can be found at
L<https://www.wireshark.org>.

HTML versions of the Wireshark project man pages are available at:
L<https://www.wireshark.org/docs/man-pages>.

=head1 AUTHORS


=for html <style>div#authors pre, div#authors pre code { white-space: pre-wrap; }</style>

=for html <div id=authors>

=for man .nf


=head2 Original Author

    Gerald Combs            <gerald[AT]wireshark.org>


=head2 Contributors

    Gilbert Ramirez         <gram[AT]alumni.rice.edu>
    Thomas Bottom           <tom.bottom[AT]labxtechnologies.com>
    Chris Pane              <chris.pane[AT]labxtechnologies.com>
    Hannes R. Boehm         <hannes[AT]boehm.org>
    Mike Hall               <mike[AT]hallzone.net>
    Bobo Rajec              <bobo[AT]bsp-consulting.sk>
    Laurent Deniel          <laurent.deniel[AT]free.fr>
    Don Lafontaine          <lafont02[AT]cn.ca>
    Guy Harris              <guy[AT]alum.mit.edu>
    Simon Wilkinson         <sxw[AT]dcs.ed.ac.uk>
    Jrg Mayer              <jmayer[AT]loplof.de>
    Martin Maciaszek        <fastjack[AT]i-s-o.net>
    Didier Jorand           <Didier.Jorand[AT]alcatel.fr>
    Jun-ichiro itojun Hagino <itojun[AT]itojun.org>
    Richard Sharpe          <realrichardsharpe[AT]gmail.com>
    John McDermott          <jjm[AT]jkintl.com>
    Jeff Jahr               <jjahr[AT]shastanets.com>
    Brad Robel-Forrest      <bradr[AT]watchguard.com>
    Ashok Narayanan         <ashokn[AT]cisco.com>
    Aaron Hillegass         <aaron[AT]classmax.com>
    Jason Lango             <jal[AT]netapp.com>
    Johan Feyaerts          <Johan.Feyaerts[AT]siemens.com>
    Olivier Abad            <oabad[AT]noos.fr>
    Thierry Andry           <Thierry.Andry[AT]advalvas.be>
    Jeff Foster             <jfoste[AT]woodward.com>
    Peter Torvals           <petertv[AT]xoommail.com>
    Christophe Tronche      <ch.tronche[AT]computer.org>
    Nathan Neulinger        <nneul[AT]umr.edu>
    Tomislav Vujec          <tvujec[AT]carnet.hr>
    Kojak                   <kojak[AT]bigwig.net>
    Uwe Girlich             <Uwe.Girlich[AT]philosys.de>
    Warren Young            <tangent[AT]mail.com>
    Heikki Vatiainen        <hessu[AT]cs.tut.fi>
    Greg Hankins            <gregh[AT]twoguys.org>
    Jerry Talkington        <jtalkington[AT]users.sourceforge.net>
    Dave Chapeskie          <dchapes[AT]ddm.on.ca>
    James Coe               <jammer[AT]cin.net>
    Bert Driehuis           <driehuis[AT]playbeing.org>
    Stuart Stanley          <stuarts[AT]mxmail.net>
    John Thomes             <john[AT]ensemblecom.com>
    Laurent Cazalet         <laurent.cazalet[AT]mailclub.net>
    Thomas Parvais          <thomas.parvais[AT]advalvas.be>
    Gerrit Gehnen           <G.Gehnen[AT]atrie.de>
    Craig Newell            <craign[AT]cheque.uq.edu.au>
    Ed Meaney               <emeaney[AT]cisco.com>
    Dietmar Petras          <DPetras[AT]ELSA.de>
    Fred Reimer             <fwr[AT]ga.prestige.net>
    Florian Lohoff          <flo[AT]rfc822.org>
    Jochen Friedrich        <jochen+ethereal[AT]scram.de>
    Paul Welchinski         <paul.welchinski[AT]telusplanet.net>
    Doug Nazar              <nazard[AT]dragoninc.on.ca>
    Andreas Sikkema         <h323[AT]ramdyne.nl>
    Mark Muhlestein         <mmm[AT]netapp.com>
    Graham Bloice           <graham.bloice[AT]trihedral.com>
    Ralf Schneider          <ralf.schneider[AT]alcatel.se>
    Yaniv Kaul              <mykaul[AT]gmail.com>
    Paul Ionescu            <paul[AT]acorp.ro>
    Mark Burton             <markb[AT]ordern.com>
    Stefan Raab             <sraab[AT]cisco.com>
    Mark Clayton            <clayton[AT]shore.net>
    Michael Rozhavsky       <mike[AT]tochna.technion.ac.il>
    Dug Song                <dugsong[AT]monkey.org>
    Michael Txen           <tuexen[AT]wireshark.org>
    Bruce Korb              <bkorb[AT]sco.com>
    Jose Pedro Oliveira     <jpo[AT]di.uminho.pt>
    David Frascone          <dave[AT]frascone.com>
    Peter Kjellerstedt      <pkj[AT]axis.com>
    Phil Techau             <phil_t[AT]altavista.net>
    Wes Hardaker            <hardaker[AT]users.sourceforge.net>
    Robert Tsai             <rtsai[AT]netapp.com>
    Craig Metz              <cmetz[AT]inner.net>
    Per Flock               <per.flock[AT]axis.com>
    Jack Keane              <jkeane[AT]OpenReach.com>
    Brian Wellington        <bwelling[AT]xbill.org>
    Santeri Paavolainen     <santtu[AT]ssh.com>
    Ulrich Kiermayr         <uk[AT]ap.univie.ac.at>
    Neil Hunter             <neil.hunter[AT]energis-squared.com>
    Ralf Holzer             <ralf[AT]well.com>
    Craig Rodrigues         <rodrigc[AT]attbi.com>
    Ed Warnicke             <hagbard[AT]physics.rutgers.edu>
    Johan Jorgensen         <johan.jorgensen[AT]axis.com>
    Frank Singleton         <frank.singleton[AT]ericsson.com>
    Kevin Shi               <techishi[AT]ms22.hinet.net>
    Mike Frisch             <mfrisch[AT]isurfer.ca>
    Burke Lau               <burke_lau[AT]agilent.com>
    Martti Kuparinen        <martti.kuparinen[AT]iki.fi>
    David Hampton           <dhampton[AT]mac.com>
    Kent Engstrm           <kent[AT]unit.liu.se>
    Ronnie Sahlberg         <ronniesahlberg[AT]gmail.com>
    Borosa Tomislav         <tomislav.borosa[AT]SIEMENS.HR>
    Alexandre P. Ferreira   <alexandref[AT]tcoip.com.br>
    Simharajan Srishylam    <Simharajan.Srishylam[AT]netapp.com>
    Greg Kilfoyle           <gregk[AT]redback.com>
    James E. Flemer         <jflemer[AT]acm.jhu.edu>
    Peter Lei               <peterlei[AT]cisco.com>
    Thomas Gimpel           <thomas.gimpel[AT]ferrari.de>
    Albert Chin             <china[AT]thewrittenword.com>
    Charles Levert          <charles[AT]comm.polymtl.ca>
    Todd Sabin              <tas[AT]webspan.net>
    Eduardo Prez Ureta     <eperez[AT]dei.inf.uc3m.es>
    Martin Thomas           <martin_a_thomas[AT]yahoo.com>
    Hartmut Mueller         <hartmut[AT]wendolene.ping.de>
    Michal Melerowicz       <Michal.Melerowicz[AT]nokia.com>
    Hannes Gredler          <hannes[AT]juniper.net>
    Inoue                   <inoue[AT]ainet.or.jp>
    Olivier Biot            <obiot.ethereal[AT]gmail.com>
    Patrick Wolfe           <pjw[AT]zocalo.cellular.ameritech.com>
    Martin Held             <Martin.Held[AT]icn.siemens.de>
    Riaan Swart             <rswart[AT]cs.sun.ac.za>
    Christian Lacunza       <celacunza[AT]gmx.net>
    Scott Renfro            <scott[AT]renfro.org>
    Juan Toledo             <toledo[AT]users.sourceforge.net>
    Jean-Christian Pennetier <jeanchristian.pennetier[AT]rd.francetelecom.fr>
    Jian Yu                 <bgp4news[AT]yahoo.com>
    Eran Mann               <emann[AT]opticalaccess.com>
    Andy Hood               <ajhood[AT]fl.net.au>
    Randy McEoin            <rmceoin[AT]ahbelo.com>
    Edgar Iglesias          <edgar.iglesias[AT]axis.com>
    Martina Obermeier       <Martina.Obermeier[AT]icn.siemens.de>
    Javier Achirica         <achirica[AT]ttd.net>
    B. Johannessen          <bob[AT]havoq.com>
    Thierry Pelle           <thierry.pelle[AT]laposte.net>
    Francisco Javier Cabello <fjcabello[AT]vtools.es>
    Laurent Rabret          <laurent.rabret[AT]rd.francetelecom.fr>
    nuf si                  <gnippiks[AT]yahoo.com>
    Jeff Morriss            <jeff.morriss.ws[AT]gmail.com>
    Aamer Akhter            <aakhter[AT]cisco.com>
    Pekka Savola            <pekkas[AT]netcore.fi>
    David Eisner            <deisner[AT]gmail.com>
    Steve Dickson           <steved[AT]talarian.com>
    Markus Seehofer         <Markus.Seehofer[AT]hirschmann.de>
    Lee Berger              <lberger[AT]roy.org>
    Motonori Shindo         <motonori[AT]shin.do>
    Terje Krogdahl          <tekr[AT]nextra.com>
    Jean-Francois Mule      <jfm[AT]cablelabs.com>
    Thomas Wittwer          <thomas.wittwer[AT]iclip.ch>
    Matthias Nyffenegger    <matthias.nyffenegger[AT]iclip.ch>
    Palle Lyckegaard        <Palle[AT]lyckegaard.dk>
    Nicolas Balkota         <balkota[AT]mac.com>
    Tom Uijldert            <Tom.Uijldert[AT]cmg.nl>
    Akira Endoh             <endoh[AT]netmarks.co.jp>
    Graeme Hewson           <ghewson[AT]wormhole.me.uk>
    Pasi Eronen             <pe[AT]iki.fi>
    Georg von Zezschwitz    <gvz[AT]2scale.net>
    Steffen Weinreich       <steve[AT]weinreich.org>
    Marc Milgram            <ethereal[AT]mmilgram.NOSPAMmail.net>
    Gordon McKinney         <gordon[AT]night-ray.com>
    Pavel Novotny           <Pavel.Novotny[AT]icn.siemens.de>
    Shinsuke Suzuki         <suz[AT]kame.net>
    Andrew C. Feren         <acferen[AT]yahoo.com>
    Tomas Kukosa            <tomas.kukosa[AT]siemens.com>
    Andreas Stockmeier      <a.stockmeier[AT]avm.de>
    Pekka Nikander          <pekka.nikander[AT]nomadiclab.com>
    Hamish Moffatt          <hamish[AT]cloud.net.au>
    Kazushi Sugyo           <k-sugyou[AT]nwsl.mesh.ad.jp>
    Tim Potter              <tpot[AT]samba.org>
    Raghu Angadi            <rangadi[AT]inktomi.com>
    Taisuke Sasaki          <sasaki[AT]soft.net.fujitsu.co.jp>
    Tim Newsham             <newsham[AT]lava.net>
    Tom Nisbet              <Tnisbet[AT]VisualNetworks.com>
    Darren New              <dnew[AT]san.rr.com>
    Pavel Mores             <pvl[AT]uh.cz>
    Bernd Becker            <bb[AT]bernd-becker.de>
    Heinz Prantner          <Heinz.Prantner[AT]radisys.com>
    Irfan Khan              <ikhan[AT]qualcomm.com>
    Jayaram V.R             <vjayar[AT]cisco.com>
    Dinesh Dutt             <ddutt[AT]cisco.com>
    Nagarjuna Venna         <nvenna[AT]Brixnet.com>
    Jirka Novak             <j.novak[AT]netsystem.cz>
    Ricardo Barroetavea    <rbarroetavena[AT]veufort.com>
    Alan Harrison           <alanharrison[AT]mail.com>
    Mike Frantzen           <frantzen[AT]w4g.org>
    Charlie Duke            <cduke[AT]fvc.com>
    Alfred Arnold           <Alfred.Arnold[AT]elsa.de>
    Dermot Bradley          <dermot.bradley[AT]openwave.com>
    Adam Sulmicki           <adam[AT]cfar.umd.edu>
    Kari Tiirikainen        <kari.tiirikainen[AT]nokia.com>
    John Mackenzie          <John.A.Mackenzie[AT]t-online.de>
    Peter Valchev           <pvalchev[AT]openbsd.org>
    Alex Rozin              <Arozin[AT]mrv.com>
    Jouni Malinen           <jkmaline[AT]cc.hut.fi>
    Paul E. Erkkila         <pee[AT]erkkila.org>
    Jakob Schlyter          <jakob[AT]openbsd.org>
    Jim Sienicki            <sienicki[AT]issanni.com>
    Steven French           <sfrench[AT]us.ibm.com>
    Diana Eichert           <deicher[AT]sandia.gov>
    Blair Cooper            <blair[AT]teamon.com>
    Kikuchi Ayamura         <ayamura[AT]ayamura.org>
    Didier Gautheron        <dgautheron[AT]magic.fr>
    Phil Williams           <csypbw[AT]comp.leeds.ac.uk>
    Kevin Humphries         <khumphries[AT]networld.com>
    Erik Nordstrm          <erik.nordstrom[AT]it.uu.se>
    Devin Heitmueller       <dheitmueller[AT]netilla.com>
    Chenjiang Hu            <chu[AT]chiaro.com>
    Kan Sasaki              <sasaki[AT]fcc.ad.jp>
    Stefan Wenk             <stefan.wenk[AT]gmx.at>
    Ruud Linders            <ruud[AT]lucent.com>
    Andrew Esh              <Andrew.Esh[AT]tricord.com>
    Greg Morris             <GMORRIS[AT]novell.com>
    Dirk Steinberg          <dws[AT]dirksteinberg.de>
    Kari Heikkila           <kari.o.heikkila[AT]nokia.com>
    Olivier Dreux           <Olivier.Dreux[AT]alcatel.fr>
    Michael Stiller         <ms[AT]2scale.net>
    Antti Tuominen          <ajtuomin[AT]tml.hut.fi>
    Martin Gignac           <lmcgign[AT]mobilitylab.net>
    John Wells              <wells[AT]ieee.org>
    Loic Tortay             <tortay[AT]cc.in2p3.fr>
    Steve Housley           <Steve_Housley[AT]eur.3com.com>
    Peter Hawkins           <peter[AT]hawkins.emu.id.au>
    Bill Fumerola           <billf[AT]FreeBSD.org>
    Chris Waters            <chris[AT]waters.co.nz>
    Solomon Peachy          <pizza[AT]shaftnet.org>
    Jaime Fournier          <Jaime.Fournier[AT]hush.com>
    Markus Steinmann        <ms[AT]seh.de>
    Tsutomu Mieno           <iitom[AT]utouto.com>
    Yasuhiro Shirasaki      <yasuhiro[AT]gnome.gr.jp>
    Anand V. Narwani        <anand[AT]narwani.org>
    Christopher K. St. John <cks[AT]distributopia.com>
    Nix                     <nix[AT]esperi.demon.co.uk>
    Liviu Daia              <Liviu.Daia[AT]imar.ro>
    Richard Urwin           <richard[AT]soronlin.org.uk>
    Prabhakar Krishnan      <Prabhakar.Krishnan[AT]netapp.com>
    Jim McDonough           <jmcd[AT]us.ibm.com>
    Sergei Shokhor          <sshokhor[AT]uroam.com>
    Hidetaka Ogawa          <ogawa[AT]bs2.qnes.nec.co.jp>
    Jan Kratochvil          <short[AT]ucw.cz>
    Alfred Koebler          <ak[AT]icon-sult.de>
    Vassilii Khachaturov    <Vassilii.Khachaturov[AT]comverse.com>
    Bill Studenmund         <wrstuden[AT]wasabisystems.com>
    Brian Bruns             <camber[AT]ais.org>
    Flavio Poletti          <flavio[AT]polettix.it>
    Marcus Haebler          <haeblerm[AT]yahoo.com>
    Ulf Lamping             <ulf.lamping[AT]web.de>
    Matthew Smart           <smart[AT]monkey.org>
    Luke Howard             <lukeh[AT]au.padl.com>
    PC Drew                 <drewpc[AT]ibsncentral.com>
    Renzo Tomas             <renzo.toma[AT]xs4all.nl>
    Clive A. Stubbings      <eth[AT]vjet.demon.co.uk>
    Steve Langasek          <vorlon[AT]netexpress.net>
    Brad Hards              <bhards[AT]bigpond.net.au>
    cjs 2895                <cjs2895[AT]hotmail.com>
    Lutz Jaenicke           <Lutz.Jaenicke[AT]aet.TU-Cottbus.DE>
    Senthil Kumar Nagappan  <sknagappan[AT]yahoo.com>
    Jason House             <jhouse[AT]mitre.org>
    Peter Fales             <psfales[AT]lucent.com>
    Fritz Budiyanto         <fritzb88[AT]yahoo.com>
    Jean-Baptiste Marchand  <Jean-Baptiste.Marchand[AT]hsc.fr>
    Andreas Trauer          <andreas.trauer[AT]siemens.com>
    Ronald Henderson        <Ronald.Henderson[AT]CognicaseUSA.com>
    Brian Ginsbach          <ginsbach[AT]cray.com>
    Dave Richards           <d_m_richards[AT]comcast.net>
    Martin Regner           <martin.regner[AT]chello.se>
    Jason Greene            <jason[AT]inetgurus.net>
    Marco Molteni           <mmolteni[AT]cisco.com>
    James Harris            <jharris[AT]fourhorsemen.org>
    rmkml                   <rmkml[AT]wanadoo.fr>
    Anders Broman           <anders.broman[AT]ericsson.com>
    Christian Falckenberg   <christian.falckenberg[AT]nortelnetworks.com>
    Huagang Xie             <xie[AT]lids.org>
    Pasi Kovanen            <Pasi.Kovanen[AT]tahoenetworks.fi>
    Teemu Rinta-aho         <teemu.rinta-aho[AT]nomadiclab.com>
    Martijn Schipper        <mschipper[AT]globespanvirata.com>
    Wayne Parrott           <wayne_p[AT]pacific.net.au>
    Laurent Meyer           <laurent.meyer6[AT]wanadoo.fr>
    Lars Roland             <Lars.Roland[AT]gmx.net>
    Miha Jemec              <m.jemec[AT]iskratel.si>
    Markus Friedl           <markus[AT]openbsd.org>
    Todd Montgomery         <tmontgom[AT]tibco.com>
    emre                    <emre[AT]flash.net>
    Stephen Shelley         <steve.shelley[AT]attbi.com>
    Erwin Rol               <erwin[AT]erwinrol.com>
    Duncan Laurie           <duncan[AT]sun.com>
    Tony Schene             <schene[AT]pcisys.net>
    Matthijs Melchior       <mmelchior[AT]xs4all.nl>
    Garth Bushell           <gbushell[AT]elipsan.com>
    Mark C. Brown           <mbrown[AT]hp.com>
    Can Erkin Acar          <canacar[AT]eee.metu.edu.tr>
    Martin Warnes           <martin.warnes[AT]ntlworld.com>
    J Bruce Fields          <bfields[AT]fieldses.org>
    tz                      <tz1[AT]mac.com>
    Jeff Liu                <jqliu[AT]broadcom.com>
    Niels Koot              <Niels.Koot[AT]logicacmg.com>
    Lionel Ains             <lains[AT]gmx.net>
    Joakim Wiberg           <jow[AT]hms-networks.com>
    Jeff Rizzo              <riz[AT]boogers.sf.ca.us>
    Christoph Wiest         <ch.wiest[AT]tesionmail.de>
    Xuan Zhang              <xz[AT]aemail4u.com>
    Thierry Martin          <thierry.martin[AT]accellent-group.com>
    Oleg Terletsky          <oleg.terletsky[AT]comverse.com>
    Michael Lum             <mlum[AT]telostech.com>
    Shiang-Ming Huang       <smhuang[AT]pcs.csie.nctu.edu.tw>
    Tony Lindstrom          <tony.lindstrom[AT]ericsson.com>
    Niklas Ogren            <niklas.ogren[AT]71.se>
    Jesper Peterson         <jesper[AT]endace.com>
    Giles Scott             <gscott[AT]arubanetworks.com>
    Vincent Jardin          <vincent.jardin[AT]6wind.com>
    Jean-Michel Fayard      <jean-michel.fayard[AT]moufrei.de>
    Josef Korelus           <jkor[AT]quick.cz>
    Brian K. Teravskis      <Brian_Teravskis[AT]Cargill.com>
    Nathan Jennings         <natej.git[AT]gmail.com>
    Hans Viens              <hviens[AT]mediatrix.com>
    Kevin A. Noll           <kevin.noll[AT]versatile.com>
    Emanuele Caratti        <wiz[AT]libero.it>
    Graeme Reid             <graeme.reid[AT]norwoodsystems.com>
    Lars Ruoff              <lars.ruoff[AT]sxb.bsf.alcatel.fr>
    Samuel Qu               <samuel.qu[AT]utstar.com>
    Baktha Muralitharan     <muralidb[AT]cisco.com>
    Loc Minier             <lool[AT]dooz.org>
    Marcel Holtmann         <marcel[AT]holtmann.org>
    Scott Emberley          <scotte[AT]netinst.com>
    Brian Fundakowski Feldman <bfeldman[AT]fla.fujitsu.com>
    Yuriy Sidelnikov        <ysidelnikov[AT]hotmail.com>
    Matthias Drochner       <M.Drochner[AT]fz-juelich.de>
    Dave Sclarsky           <dave_sclarsky[AT]cnt.com>
    Scott Hovis             <scott.hovis[AT]ums.msfc.nasa.gov>
    David Fort              <david.fort[AT]irisa.fr>
    Felix Fei               <felix.fei[AT]utstar.com>
    Christoph Neusch        <christoph.neusch[AT]nortelnetworks.com>
    Jan Kiszka              <jan.kiszka[AT]web.de>
    Joshua Craig Douglas    <jdouglas[AT]enterasys.com>
    Dick Gooris             <gooris[AT]alcatel-lucent.com>
    Michael Shuldman        <michaels[AT]inet.no>
    Tadaaki Nagao           <nagao[AT]iij.ad.jp>
    Aaron Woo               <woo[AT]itd.nrl.navy.mil>
    Chris Wilson            <chris[AT]mxtelecom.com>
    Rolf Fiedler            <Rolf.Fiedler[AT]Innoventif.com>
    Alastair Maw            <ethereal[AT]almaw.com>
    Sam Leffler             <sam[AT]errno.com>
    Martin Mathieson        <martin.r.mathieson[AT]googlemail.com>
    Christian Wagner        <Christian.Wagner[AT]stud.uni-karlsruhe.de>
    Edwin Calo              <calo[AT]fusemail.com>
    Ian Schorr              <ischorr[AT]comcast.net>
    Rowan McFarland         <rmcfarla[AT]cisco.com>
    John Engelhart          <johne[AT]zang.com>
    Ryuji Somegawa          <ryuji-so[AT]is.aist-nara.ac.jp>
    metatech                <metatechbe[AT]gmail.com>
    Brian Wheeler           <Brian.Wheeler[AT]arrisi.com>
    Josh Bailey             <joshbailey[AT]lucent.com>
    Jelmer Vernooij         <jelmer[AT]samba.org>
    Duncan Sargeant         <dunc-ethereal-dev[AT]rcpt.to>
    Love Hrnquist strand  <lha[AT]it.su.se>
    Lukas Pokorny           <maskis[AT]seznam.cz>
    Carlos Pignataro        <cpignata[AT]cisco.com>
    Thomas Anders           <thomas.anders[AT]blue-cable.de>
    Rich Coe                <Richard.Coe[AT]med.ge.com>
    Dominic Bchaz          <bdo[AT]zhwin.ch>
    Richard van der Hoff	<richardv[AT]mxtelecom.com>
    Shaun Jackman		<sjackman[AT]gmail.com>
    Jon Oberheide           <jon[AT]oberheide.org>
    Henry Ptasinski		<henryp[AT]broadcom.com>
    Roberto Morro		<roberto.morro[AT]telecomitalia.it>
    Chris Maynard		<Christopher.Maynard[AT]GTECH.COM>
    SEKINE Hideki		<sekineh[AT]gf7.so-net.ne.jp>
    Jeff Connelly		<shellreef+mp2p[AT]gmail.com>
    Irene Rngeler		<ruengeler[AT]wireshark.org>
    M. Ortega y Strupp	<moys[AT]loplof.de>
    Kelly Byrd		<kbyrd-ethereal[AT]memcpy.com>
    Luis Ontanon		<luis.ontanon[AT]gmail.com>
    Luca Deri		<deri[AT]ntop.org>
    Viorel Suman		<vsuman[AT]avmob.ro>
    Alejandro Vaquero	<alejandro.vaquero[AT]verso.com>
    Francesco Fondelli	<francesco.fondelli[AT]gmail.com>
    Artem Tamazov           <artem.tamazov[AT]tellabs.com>
    Dmitry Trebich          <dmitry.trebich[AT]gmail.com>
    Bill Meier		<wmeier[AT]newsguy.com>
    Susanne Edlund		<Susanne.Edlund[AT]ericsson.com>
    Victor Stratan		<hidralisk[AT]yahoo.com>
    Peter Johansson		<PeterJohansson73[AT]gmail.com>
    Stefan Metzmacher	<metze[AT]samba.org>
    Abhijit Menon-Sen	<ams[AT]oryx.com>
    James Fields		<jvfields[AT]tds.net>
    Kevin Johnson		<kjohnson[AT]secureideas.net>
    Mike Duigou		<bondolo[AT]dev.java.net>
    Deepak Jain		<jain1971[AT]yahoo.com>
    Stefano Pettini		<spettini[AT]users.sourceforge.net>
    Jon Ringle		<ml-ethereal[AT]ringle.org>
    Tim Endean		<endeant[AT]hotmail.com>
    Charlie Lenahan		<clenahan[AT]fortresstech.com>
    Takeshi Nakashima	<T.Nakashima[AT]jp.yokogawa.com>
    Shoichi Sakane		<sakane[AT]tanu.org>
    Michael Richardson	<Michael.Richardson[AT]protiviti.com>
    Olivier Jacques		<olivier.jacques[AT]hp.com>
    Francisco Alcoba	<francisco.alcoba[AT]ericsson.com>
    Nils O. Selsdal	<noselasd[AT]asgaard.homelinux.org>
    Guillaume Chazarain 	<guichaz[AT]yahoo.fr>
    Angelo Bannack		<angelo.bannack[AT]siemens.com>
    Paolo Frigo		<paolofrigo[AT]gmail.com>
    Jeremy J Ouellette	<jouellet[AT]scires.com>
    Aboo Valappil		<valappil_aboo[AT]emc.com>
    Fred Hoekstra		<fred.hoekstra[AT]philips.com>
    Ankur Aggarwal		<ankur[AT]in.athenasemi.com>
    Lucian Piros		<lpiros[AT]avmob.ro>
    Juan Gonzalez		<juan.gonzalez[AT]pikatech.com>
    Brian Bogora		<brian_bogora[AT]mitel.com>
    Jim Young		<sysjhy[AT]langate.gsu.edu>
    Jeff Snyder		<jeff[AT]mxtelecom.com>
    William Fiveash		<William.Fiveash[AT]sun.com>
    Graeme Lunt		<graeme.lunt[AT]smhs.co.uk>
    Menno Andriesse		<s5066[AT]nc3a.nato.int>
    Stig Bjrlykke		<stig[AT]bjorlykke.org>
    Kyle J. Harms		<kyle.j.harms[AT]boeing.com>
    Eric Wedel		<ewedel[AT]bluearc.com>
    Secfire			<secfire[AT]gmail.com>
    Eric Hultin		<Eric.Hultin[AT]arrisi.com>
    Paolo Abeni		<paolo.abeni[AT]email.it>
    W. Borgert		<debacle[AT]debian.org>
    Frederic Roudaut	<frederic.roudaut[AT]irisa.fr>
    Christoph Scholz	<scholz_ch[AT]web.de>
    Wolfgang Hansmann	<hansmann[AT]cs.uni-bonn.de>
    Kees Cook		<kees[AT]outflux.net>
    Thomas Dreibholz	<dreibh[AT]iem.uni-due.de>
    Authesserre Samuel	<sauthess[AT]gmail.com>
    Balint Reczey		<balint[AT]balintreczey.hu>
    Stephen Fisher		<stephenfisher[AT]centurylink.net>
    Krzysztof Burghardt	<krzysztof[AT]burghardt.pl>
    Peter Racz		<racz[AT]ifi.unizh.ch>
    Jakob Bratkovic		<j.bratkovic[AT]iskratel.si>
    Mark Lewis		<mlewis[AT]altera.com>
    David Buechi		<bhd[AT]zhwin.ch>
    Bill Florac		<bill.florac[AT]etcconnect.com>
    Alex Burlyga		<Alex.Burlyga[AT]netapp.com>
    Douglas Pratley		<Douglas.pratley[AT]detica.com>
    Giorgio Tino		<giorgio.tino[AT]cacetech.com>
    Davide Schiera		<davide.schiera[AT]riverbed.com>
    Sebastien Tandel	<sebastien[AT]tandel.be>
    Clay Jones		<clay.jones[AT]email.com>
    Kriang Lerdsuwanakij	<lerdsuwa[AT]users.sourceforge.net>
    Abhik Sarkar 		<sarkar.abhik[AT]gmail.com>
    Robin Seggelmann	<seggelmann[AT]fh-muenster.de>
    Chris Bontje		<cbontje[AT]gmail.com>
    Ryan Wamsley		<wamslers[AT]sbcglobal.net>
    Dave Butt		<davidbutt[AT]mxtelecom.com>
    Julian Cable		<julian_cable[AT]yahoo.com>
    Joost Yervante Damad	<joost[AT]teluna.org>
    Martin Sustrik		<sustrik[AT]imatix.com>
    Jon Smirl		<jonsmirl[AT]gmail.com>
    David Kennedy		<sgsguy[AT]gmail.com>
    Matthijs Mekking	<matthijs[AT]mlnetlabs.nl>
    Dustin Johnson		<dustin[AT]dustinj.us>
    Victor Fajardo		<vfajardo[AT]tari.toshiba.com>
    Tamas Regos		<tamas.regos[AT]ericsson.com>
    Mshe van der Sterre	<moshevds[AT]gmail.com>
    Rob Casey		<rcasey[AT]gmail.com>
    Ted Percival		<ted[AT]midg3t.net>
    Marc Petit-Huguenin	<marc[AT]petit-huguenin.org>
    Florent Drouin		<florent.drouin[AT]alcatel-lucent.fr>
    Karen Feng		<kfeng[AT]fas.harvard.edu>
    Stephen Croll		<croll[AT]mobilemetrics.net>
    Jens Bruer		<jensb[AT]cs.tu-berlin.de>
    Sake Blok		<sake[AT]euronet.nl>
    Fulko Hew		<fulko.hew[AT]gmail.com>
    Yukiyo Akisada		<Yukiyo.Akisada[AT]jp.yokogawa.com>
    Andy Chu		<chu.dev[AT]gmail.com>
    Shane Kearns		<shane.kearns[AT]symbian.com>
    Loris Degioanni		<loris.degioanni[AT]riverbed.com>
    Sven Meier		<msv[AT]zhwin.ch>
    Holger Pfrommer		<hpfrommer[AT]hilscher.com>
    Hariharan Ananthakrishnan <hariharan.a[AT]gmail.com>
    Hannes Klber		<hannes.kaelber--wireshark[AT]x2e.de>
    Stephen Donnelly	<stephen[AT]endace.com>
    Philip Frey		<frey.philip[AT]gmail.com>
    Yves Geissbuehler	<yves.geissbuehler[AT]gmail.com>
    Shigeo Nakamura		<naka_shigeo[AT]yahoo.co.jp>
    Sven Eckelmann		<sven[AT]narfation.org>
    Edward J. Paradise	<pdice[AT]cisco.com>
    Brian Stormont		<nospam[AT]stormyprods.com>
    Vincent Helfre		<vincent.helfre[AT]ericsson.com>
    Brooss			<brooss.teambb[AT]gmail.com>
    Joan Rami		<joan[AT]ramio.cat>
    David Castleford	<david.castleford[AT]orange-ftgroup.com>
    Peter Harris		<pharris[AT]opentext.com>
    Martin Lutz		<MartinL[AT]copadata.at>
    Johnny Mitrevski	<mitrevj[AT]hotmail.com>
    Neil Horman		<nhorman[AT]tuxdriver.com>
    Andreas Schuler		<krater[AT]badterrorist.com>
    Matthias Wenzel		<dect[AT]mazzoo.de>
    Christian Durrer	<christian.durrer[AT]sensemail.ch>
    Naoyoshi Ueda		<piyomaru3141[AT]gmail.com>
    Javier Cardona		<javier[AT]cozybit.com>
    Jens Steinhauser	<jens.steinhauser[AT]omicron.at>
    Julien Kerihuel		<j.kerihuel[AT]openchange.org>
    Vincenzo Condoleo	<vcondole[AT]hsr.ch>
    Mohammad Ebrahim Mohammadi Panah <mebrahim[AT]gmail.com>
    Greg Schwendimann	<gregs[AT]iol.unh.edu>
    Nick Lewis		<nick.lewis[AT]atltelecom.com>
    Fred Fierling		<fff[AT]exegin.com>
    Samu Varjonen		<samu.varjonen[AT]hiit.fi>
    Alexis La Goutte	<alexis.lagoutte[AT]gmail.com>
    Varun Notibala		<nbvarun[AT]gmail.com>
    Nathan Hartwell		<nhartwell[AT]gmail.com>
    Don Chirieleison	<donc[AT]mitre.org>
    Harald Welte		<laforge[AT]gnumonks.org>
    Chris Costa		<chcosta75[AT]hotmail.com>
    Bruno Prmont		<bonbons[AT]linux-vserver.org>
    Florian Forster		<octo[AT]verplant.org>
    Ivan Sy Jr.		<ivan_jr[AT]yahoo.com>
    Matthieu Patou		<mat[AT]matws.net>
    Kovarththanan Rajaratnam <kovarththanan.rajaratnam[AT]gmail.com>
    Matt Watchinski		<mwatchinski[AT]sourcefire.com>
    Ravi Kondamuru		<Ravi.Kondamuru[AT]citrix.com>
    Jan Gerbecks		<jan.gerbecks[AT]stud.uni-due.de>
    Vladimir Smrekar	<vladimir.smrekar[AT]gmail.com>
    Tobias Erichsen 	<t.erichsen[AT]gmx.de>
    Erwin van Eijk		<erwin.vaneijk[AT]gmail.com>
    Venkateshwaran Dorai	<venkateshwaran.d[AT]gmail.com>
    Ben Greear		<greearb[AT]candelatech.com>
    Richard Kmmel		<r.kuemmel[AT]beckhoff.de>
    Yi Yu			<yiyu.inbox[AT]gmail.com>
    Aniruddha A		<aniruddha.a[AT]gmail.com>
    David Aggeler		<david_aggeler[AT]hispeed.ch>
    Jens Kilian		<jjk[AT]acm.org>
    David Bond		<mokon[AT]mokon.net>
    Paul J. Metzger		<pjm[AT]ll.mit.edu>
    Robert Hogan		<robert[AT]roberthogan.net>
    Torrey Atcitty		<torrey.atcitty[AT]harman.com>
    Dave Olsen		<dave.olsen[AT]harman.com>
    Craig Gunther		<craig.gunther[AT]harman.com>
    Levi Pearson		<levi.pearson[AT]harman.com>
    Allan M. Madsen		<allan.m[AT]madsen.dk>
    Slava			<slavak[AT]gmail.com>
    H.sivank		<hsivank[AT]gmail.com>
    Edgar Gladkich		<edgar.gladkich[AT]inacon.de>
    Michael Bernhard	<michael.bernhard[AT]bfh.ch>
    Holger Hans Peter Freyther <zecke[AT]selfish.org>
    Jose Pico		<jose[AT]taddong.com>
    David Perez		<david[AT]taddong.com>
    Hkon Nessjen		<haakon.nessjoen[AT]gmail.com>
    Herbert Lischka		<herbert[AT]lischka-berlin.de>
    Felix Krmer		<sauter-cumulus[AT]de.sauter-bc.com>
    Tom Hughes		<tom[AT]compton.nu>
    Owen Kirby		<osk[AT]exegin.com>
    Colin O'Flynn		<coflynn[AT]newae.com>
    Juha Siltanen		<juha.siltanen[AT]nsn.com>
    Cal Turney		<cturney[AT]charter.net>
    Lukasz Kotasa		<lukasz.kotasa[AT]tieto.com>
    Jason Masker		<jason[AT]masker.net>
    Giuliano Fabris		<giuliano.fabris[AT]appeartv.com>
    Alexander Koeppe	<format_c[AT]online.de>
    Holger Grandy 		<Holger.Grandy[AT]bmw-carit.de>
    Hadriel Kaplan		<hadrielk[AT]yahoo.com>
    Srinivasa Pradeep	<sippyemail-wireshark[AT]yahoo.com>
    Lori Tribble		<ljtconsulting[AT]gmail.com>
    Thomas Boehne		<TBoehne[AT]ADwin.de>
    Gerhard Gappmeier	<gerhard.gappmeier[AT]ascolab.com>
    Hannes Mezger		<hannes.mezger[AT]ascolab.com>
    David Katz		<dkatz[AT]airspan.com>
    Toralf Frster		<toralf.foerster[AT]gmx.de>
    Stphane Bryant		<stephane[AT]glycon.org>
    Emil Wojak		<emil[AT]wojak.eu>
    Steve Huston		<shuston[AT]riverace.com>
    Lornd Jakab		<ljakab[AT]ac.upc.edu>
    Grzegorz Szczytowski	<Grzegorz.Szczytowski[AT]gmail.com>
    Martin Kaiser		<wireshark[AT]kaiser.cx>
    Jakub Zawadzki		<darkjames-ws[AT]darkjames.pl>
    Roland Knall		<roland.knall[AT]br-automation.com>
    Xiao Xiangquan		<xiaoxiangquan[AT]gmail.com>
    Hans-Christoph Schemmel	<hans-christoph.schemmel[AT]cinterion.com>
    Tyson Key		<tyson.key[AT]gmail.com>
    Johannes Jochen		<johannes.jochen[AT]belden.com>
    Florian Fainelli	<florian[AT]openwrt.org>
    Daniel Willmann		<daniel[AT]totalueberwachung.de>
    Brian Cavagnolo		<brian[AT]cozybit.com>
    Allison			<aobourn[AT]isilon.com>
    Edwin Groothuis		<wireshark[AT]mavetju.org>
    Andrew Kampjes		<andrew.kampjes[AT]endace.com>
    Kurnia Hendrawan	<kurnia.hendrawan[AT]consistec.de>
    Leonard Tracy		<letracy[AT]cisco.com>
    Elliott Aldrich		<elliott[AT]aldrichart.com>
    Glenn Matthews		<glenn.matthews[AT]cisco.com>
    Donnie Savage		<dsavage[AT]cisco.com>
    Spenser Sheng		<spenser.sheng[AT]ericsson.com>
    Benjamin Stocks		<bmstocks[AT]ra.rockwell.com>
    Florian Reichert	<refl[AT]zhaw.ch>
    Martin Renold		<reld[AT]zhaw.ch>
    Iain Arnell		<iarnell[AT]epo.org>
    Mariusz Okrj		<okrojmariusz[AT]gmail.com>
    Ivan Lawrow		<ivan.lawrow[AT]jennic.com>
    Kari Vatjus-Anttila	<kari.vatjus-anttila[AT]cie.fi>
    Shobhank Sharma		<ssharma5[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Salil Kanitkar		<sskanitk[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Michael Sakaluk		<mdsakalu[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Mayuresh Raut		<msraut[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Sheetal Kshirsagar	<sdkshirs[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Andrew Williams		<anwilli5[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Per Liedberg		<per.liedberg[AT]ericsson.com>
    Gaurav Tungatkar	<gauravstt[AT]gmail.com>
    Bill Schiller		<bill.schiller[AT]emerson.com>
    Aditya Ambadkar		<arambadk[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Diana Chris		<dvchris[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Guy Martin		<gmsoft[AT]tuxicoman.be>
    Deepti Ragha		<dlragha[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Niels de Vos		<ndevos[AT]redhat.com>
    Clement Marrast		<clement.marrast[AT]molex.com>
    Jacob Nordgren		<jnordgren[AT]gmail.com>
    Rishie Sharma		<rishie[AT]kth.se>
    Richard Stearn		<richard[AT]rns-stearn.demon.co.uk>
    Tobias Rutz		<tobias.rutz[AT]work-microwave.de>
    Micha abdzki		<michal.labedzki[AT]wireshark.org>
    Micha Orynicz		<michal.orynicz[AT]tieto.com>
    Wido Kelling		<kellingwido[AT]aol.com>
    Kaushal Shah		<kshah3[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Subramanian Ramachandran <sramach6[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Manuel Hofer		<manuel[AT]mnlhfr.at>
    Gaurav Patwardhan	<gspatwar[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Peter Hatina		<phatina[AT]redhat.com>
    Tomasz Mo		<desowin[AT]gmail.com>
    Uli Heilmeier		<uh[AT]heilmeier.eu>
    Rupesh Patro		<rbpatro[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Vaibhav Katkade		<katkade_v[AT]yahoo.com>
    Allan W. Nielsen	<anielsen[AT]vitesse.com>
    Ishraq Ibne Ashraf	<ishraq[AT]tinkerforge.com>
    Robert Grange		<robionekenobi[AT]bluewin.ch>
    Zoltan Lajos Kis	<zoltan.lajos.kis[AT]ericsson.com>
    Juan Antonio Montesinos <juan.mondl[AT]gmail.com>
    Anish Bhatt		<anish[AT]chelsio.com>
    Dmitry Bazhenov		<dima_b[AT]pigeonpoint.com>
    Masatake Yamato		<yamato[AT]redhat.com>
    John Miner		<wiresharkdissectorcoder[AT]gmail.com>
      (Megumi Takeshita) <megumi[AT]ikeriri.ne.jp>
    Remi Vichery		<remi.vichery[AT]gmail.com>
    Kevin Cox		<kevincox[AT]kevincox.ca>
    David Ameiss		<dameiss[AT]29west.com>
    Sean O. Stalley		<sean.stalley[AT]intel.com>
    Qiaoyin Yang		<qiaoyin.yang[AT]gmail.com>
    Thomas Wiens		<th.wiens[AT]gmx.de>
    Gilles Roudiere		<gilles[AT]roudiere.net>
    Alexander Gaertner	<gaertner.alex[AT]gmx.de>
    Raphal Doursenaud	<rdoursenaud[AT]free.fr>
    Ryan Doyle		<ryan[AT]doylenet.net>
    Jesse Gross		<jesse[AT]nicira.com>
    Joe Fowler		<fowlerja[AT]us.ibm.com>
    Enrico Jorns		<ejo[AT]pengutronix.de>
    Hitesh K Maisheri	<maisheri.hitesh[AT]gmail.com>
    Dario Lombardo		<lomato[AT]gmail.com>
    Pratik Yeole		<pyeole[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Guillaume Autran	<gautran[AT]clearpath.ai>
    Barbu Paul - Gheorghe	<barbu.paul.gheorghe[AT]gmail.com>
    Martin Kacer	<kacer.martin[AT]gmail.com>
    Ben Stewart		<bst[AT]google.com>
    Sumit Kumar Jha		<sjha3[AT]ncsu.edu>
    Kim Kempf		<kim.kempf[AT]apcon.com>
    S. Shapira		<sswsdev[AT]gmail.com>
    Lazar Sumar		<bugzilla[AT]lazar.co.nz>
    Kingson Chan	<k.chan[AT]samsung.com>
    Ege Elgun		<e.elgun[AT]samsung.com>
    Connor Newton   <c.newton[AT]samsung.com>
    Huang Qiangxiong        <qiangxiong.huang[AT]qq.com>
    Jeffrey Nichols		<jsnichols[AT]suprocktech.com>

and by:

    Georgi Guninski		<guninski[AT]guninski.com>
    Jason Copenhaver	<jcopenha[AT]typedef.org>
    Eric Perie		<eric.perie[AT]colubris.com>
    David Yon		<yon[AT]tacticalsoftware.com>
    Marcio Franco		<franco.marcio[AT]rd.francetelecom.fr>
    Kaloian Stoilov		<kalkata[AT]yahoo.com>
    Steven Lass		<stevenlass[AT]mail.com>
    Gregory Stark		<gsstark[AT]mit.edu>
    Darren Steele		<steeley[AT]steeley.co.uk>
    Michael Kopp		<michael.kopp[AT]isarnet.de>
    Bernd Leibing		<bernd.leibing[AT]kiz.uni-ulm.de>
    Chris Heath		<chris[AT]heathens.co.nz>
    Gisle Vanem		<gvanem[AT]broadpark.no>
    Ritchie			<ritchie[AT]tipsybottle.com>
    Aki Immonen		<aki.immonen[AT]golftalma.fi>
    David E. Weekly		<david[AT]weekly.org>
    Steve Ford		<sford[AT]geeky-boy.com>
    Masaki Chikama		<masaki-c[AT]is.aist-nara.ac.jp>
    Mohammad Hanif		<mhanif[AT]nexthop.com>
    Reinhard Speyerer	<rspmn[AT]arcor.de>
    Patrick Kursawe		<phosphan[AT]gentoo.org>
    Arsen Chaloyan		<achaloyan[AT]yahoo.com>
    Arnaud Jacques		<webmaster[AT]securiteinfo.com>
    D. Manzella		<manzella[AT]lucent.com>
    Jari Mustajarvi		<jari.mustajarvi[AT]nokia.com>
    Pierre Juhen		<pierre.juhen[AT]wanadoo.fr>
    David Richards		<drichards[AT]alum.mit.edu>
    Shusaku Ueda		<ueda[AT]sra.co.jp>
    Jonathan Perkins	<jonathan.perkins[AT]ipaccess.com>
    Holger Schurig		<h.schurig[AT]mn-logistik.de>
    Peter J. Creath		<peter-ethereal[AT]creath.net>
    Magnus Hansson		<mah[AT]hms.se>
    Pavel Kankovsky		<kan[AT]dcit.cz>
    Nick Black		<dank[AT]reflexsecurity.com>
    Bill Guyton		<guyton[AT]bguyton.com>
    Chernishov Yury		<Chernishov[AT]iskrauraltel.ru>
    Thomas Palmer		<Thomas.Palmer[AT]Gunter.AF.mil>
    Clinton Work		<clinton[AT]scripty.com>
    Joe Marcus Clarke	<marcus[AT]marcuscom.com>
    Kendy Kutzner		<kutzner[AT]tm.uka.de>
    James H. Cloos Jr.	<cloos[AT]jhcloos.com>
    Tim Farley		<tfarley[AT]iss.net>
    Daniel Thompson		<daniel.thompson[AT]st.com>
    Chris Jepeway		<thai-dragon[AT]eleven29.com>
    Matthew Bradley		<matthew.bradley[AT]cnsonline.net>
    Nathan Alger		<nathan[AT]wasted.com>
    Stas Grabois		<sagig[AT]radware.com>
    Ainsley Pereira		<APereira[AT]Witness.com>
    Philippe Mazeau		<philippe.mazeau[AT]swissvoice.net>
    Carles Kishimoto	<ckishimo[AT]ac.upc.es>
    Dennis Lim		<postadal[AT]suse.cz>
    Dennis Lim		<Dennis.Lim[AT]motorola.com>
    Martin van der Werff	<martin[AT]vanderwerff.org>
    Marco van den Bovenkamp	<marco[AT]linuxgoeroe.dhs.org>
    Ming Zhang		<mingz[AT]ele.uri.edu>
    Neil Piercy		<Neil.Piercy[AT]ipaccess.com>
    Rmi Denis-Courmont	<courmisch[AT]via.ecp.fr>
    Thomas Palmer		<tpalmer[AT]elmore.rr.com>
    Mrten Svantesson	<f95-msv[AT]f.kth.se>
    Steve Sommars		(e-mail address removed at contributor's request)
    Kestutis Kupciunas	<kesha[AT]soften.ktu.lt>
    Ren Pilz		<rene.pilz[AT]ftw.at>
    Laurent Constantin	<laurent.constantin[AT]aql.fr>
    Martin Pichlmaier	<martin.pichlmaier[AT]siemens.com>
    Mark Phillips		<msp[AT]nortelnetworks.com>
    Nils Ohlmeier		<lists[AT]ohlmeier.org>
    Ignacio Goyret		<igoyret[AT]lucent.com>
    Bart Braem		<bart.braem[AT]gmail.com>
    Shingo Horisawa		<name4n5[AT]hotmail.com>
    Lane Hu			<lane.hu[AT]utstar.com>
    Marc Poulhis		<marc.poulhies[AT]epfl.ch>
    Tomasz Mrugalski	<thomson[AT]klub.com.pl>
    Brett Kuskie		<mstrprgmmr[AT]chek.com>
    Brian Caswell		<bmc[AT]sourcefire.com>
    Yann			<yann_eads[AT]hotmail.com>
    Julien Leproust		<julien[AT]via.ecp.fr>
    Mutsuya Irie		<irie[AT]sakura-catv.ne.jp>
    Yoshihiro Oyama		<y.oyama[AT]netagent.co.jp>
    Chris Eagle		<cseagle[AT]nps.edu>
    Dominique Bastien	<dbastien[AT]accedian.com>
    Nicolas Dichtel		<nicolas.dichtel[AT]6wind.com>
    Ricardo Muggli		<ricardo.muggli[AT]mnsu.edu>
    Vladimir Kondratiev	<vladimir.kondratiev[AT]gmail.com>
    Jaap Keuter		<jaap.keuter[AT]xs4all.nl>
    Frederic Peters		<fpeters[AT]debian.org>
    Anton Ivanov		<anthony_johnson[AT]mail.ru>
    Ilya Konstantinov	<future[AT]shiny.co.il>
    Neil Kettle 		<mu-b[AT]65535.com>
    Steve Karg		<skarg[AT]users.sourceforge.net>
    Javier Acuna		<javier.acuna[AT]sixbell.cl>
    Miklos Szurdi		<szurdimiklos[AT]yahoo.com>
    Cvetan Ivanov		<zezo[AT]spnet.net>
    Vasanth Manickam	<vasanth.manickam[AT]bt.com>
    Julian Onions		<julian.onions[AT]gmail.com>
    Samuel Thibault		<samuel.thibault[AT]ens-lyon.org>
    Peter Kov		<peter.kovar[AT]gmail.com>
    Paul Ollis		<paul.ollis[AT]roke.co.uk>
    Dominik Kuhlen		<dkuhlen[AT]gmx.net>
    Karl Knoebl		<karl.knoebl[AT]siemens.com>
    Maria-Luiza Crivat	<luizacri[AT]gmail.com>
    Brice Augustin		<bricecotte[AT]gmail.com>
    Matt Thornton		<MATT_THORNTON[AT]appsig.com>
    Timo Metsala		<timo.metsala[AT]gmail.com>
    Tomer Shani		<thetour[AT]japan.com>
    Manu Pathak		<mapathak[AT]cisco.com>
    John Sullivan		<john[AT]kanargh.force9.co.uk>
    Martin Andr		<andre[AT]clarinet.u-strasbg.fr>
    Andrei Emeltchenko	<Andrei.Emeltchenko[AT]nokia.com>
    Kirby Files		<kfiles[AT]masergy.com>
    Ravi Valmikam		<rvalmikam[AT]airvananet.com>
    Diego Petten		<flameeyes[AT]gentoo.org>
    Daniel Black		<dragonheart[AT]gentoo.org>
    Christoph Werle		<Christoph.Werle[AT]ira.uka.de>
    Aaron Christensen	<aaronmf[AT]gmail.com>
    Ian Abel		<ianabel[AT]mxtelecom.com>
    Bryant Eastham		<beastham[AT]slc.mew.com>
    Taner Kurtulus		<taner.kurtulus[AT]tubitak.gov.tr>
    Joe Breher		<linux[AT]q-music.com>
    Patrick vd Lageweg	<patrick[AT]bitwizard.nl>
    Thomas Sillaber		<Thomas.Sillaber[AT]gmx.de>
    Mike Davies		<m.davies[AT]btinternet.com>
    Boris Misenov		<Boris.Misenov[AT]oktelabs.ru>
    Joe McEachern		<joe[AT]qacafe.com>
    Charles Lepple		<clepple[AT]gmail.com>
    Tuomas Maattanen	<maattanen[AT]iki.fi>
    Joe Eykholt		<joe[AT]nuovasystems.com>
    Ian Brumby		<ian.brumby[AT]baesystems.com>
    Todd J Martin		<todd.martin[AT]acm.org>
    Scott Robinson		<scott.robinson[AT]flukenetworks.com>
    Martin Peylo		<wireshark[AT]izac.de>
    Stphane Loeuillet	<leroutier[AT]gmail.com>
    Andrei Rubaniuk		<rubaniuk[AT]mail.ru>
    Mikael Magnusson	<mikma264[AT]gmail.com>
    Timo Ters		<timo.teras[AT]iki.fi>
    Mrton Nmeth		<nm127[AT]freemail.hu>
    Kai Blin		<kai[AT]samba.org>
    Olivier Montanuy	<olivier.montanuy[AT]orange-ftgroup.com>
    Thomas Morin		<thomas.morin[AT]orange-ftgroup.com>
    Jesus Roman		<jroman[AT]teldat.com>
    Giodi Giorgi		<g.giorgi[AT]gmail.com>
    Peter Hertting		<Peter.Hertting[AT]gmx.net>
    Jess Balint		<jbalint[AT]gmail.com>
    Bahaa Naamneh		<b.naamneh[AT]gmail.com>
    Magnus Srman		<magnus.sorman[AT]ericsson.com>
    Pascal Quantin		<pascal.quantin[AT]gmail.com>
    Roy Marples		<roy[AT]marples.name>
    Ward van Wanrooij	<ward[AT]ward.nu>
    Federico Mena Quintero	<federico[AT]novell.com>
    Andreas Heise		<andreas.heise[AT]nextiraone.de>
    Alex Lindberg		<alindber[AT]yahoo.com>
    Rama Chitta		<rama[AT]gear6.com>
    Roberto Mariani		<jelot-wireshark[AT]jelot.it>
    Sandhya Gopinath	<Sandhya.Gopinath[AT]citrix.com>
    Raghav SN		<Raghav.SN[AT]citrix.com>
    Murali Raja		<Murali.Raja[AT]citrix.com>
    Devesh Prakash		<Devesh.Prakash[AT]citrix.com>
    Darryl Champagne	<dchampagne[AT]sta.samsung.com>
    Michael Speck		<Michael.Speck[AT]avl.com>
    Gerasimos Dimitriadis	<dimeg[AT]intracom.gr>
    Robert Simac		<rsimac[AT]cronsult.com>
    Johanna Sochos		<johanna.sochos[AT]swissqual.com>
    Felix Obenhuber		<felix[AT]obenhuber.de>
    Hilko Bengen		<bengen--wireshark[AT]hilluzination.de>
    Hadar Shoham		<hadar.shoham[AT]gmail.com>
    Robert Bullen		<robert[AT]robertbullen.com>
    Chuck Kristofek		<chuck.kristofek[AT]ngc.com>
    Markus Renz		<Markus.Renz[AT]hirschmann.de>
    Toshihiro Kataoka	<kataoka.toshihiro[AT]gmail.com>
    Petr Lautrbach		<plautrba[AT]redhat.com>
    Frank Lahm		<franklahm[AT]googlemail.com>
    Jon Ellch		<jellch[AT]harris.com>
    Alex Badea		<vamposdecampos[AT]gmail.com>
    Dirk Jagdmann		<doj[AT]cubic.org>
    RSA  			<ryazanov.s.a[AT]gmail.com>
    Juliusz Chroboczek	<jch[AT]pps.jussieu.fr>
    Vladimir Kazansky	<vovjo[AT]yandex.ru>
    Peter Paluch 		<peter.paluch[AT]fri.uniza.sk>
    Tom Brezinski		<tombr[AT]netinst.com>
    Nick Glass		<nick.glass[AT]lycos.com>
    Michael Mann		<mmann78[AT]netscape.net>
    Romain Fliedel		<romain.fliedel+wireshark[AT]gmail.com>
    Michael Chen		<michaelc[AT]idssoftware.com>
    Paul Stath		<pstath[AT]axxcelera.com>
    DeCount			<aatrade[AT]libero.it>
    Andras Veres-Szentkiralyi <vsza[AT]vsza.hu>
    Jakob Hirsch 		<jh.wireshark-bugzilla[AT]plonk.de>
     		<dpb[AT]corrigendum.ru>
     		<billyjeans[AT]gmail.com>
    Evan Huus		<eapache[AT]gmail.com>
    Tom Cook		<tcook[AT]ixiacom.com>
    Tom Alexander		<talexander[AT]ixiacom.com>
    Klaus Heckelmann	<klaus.heckelmann[AT]nashtech.com>
    Ben Bowen		<bbowen[AT]godaddy.com>
    Bodo Petermann		<bp245[AT]hotmail.com>
    Martin Kupec		<martin.kupec[AT]kupson.cz>
    Litao Gao		<ltgao[AT]juniper.net>
    Niels Widger		<niels[AT]qacafe.com>
    Pontus Fuchs		<pontus.fuchs[AT]gmail.com>
    Bill Parker		<wp02855[AT]gmail.com>
    Tomofumi Hayashi	<s1061123[AT]gmail.com>
    Tim Hentenaar		<tim.hentenaar[AT]gmail.com>
    Krishnamurthy Mayya	<krishnamurthymayya[AT]gmail.com>
    Nikitha Malgi		<nikitha01[AT]gmail.com>
    Adam Butcher		<adam[AT]jessamine.co.uk>
    Hendrik Uhlmann		<Hendrik.Uhlmann[AT]rheinmetall.com>
    Sebastiano Di Paola	<sebastiano.dipaola[AT]gmail.com>
    Steven J. Magnani	<steve[AT]digidescorp.com>
    David Arnold		<davida[AT]pobox.com>
    Alexander Chemeris	<alexander.chemeris[AT]gmail.com>
    Ivan Klyuchnikov	<kluchnikovi[AT]gmail.com>
    Max Baker		<max[AT]warped.org>
    Diederik de Groot	<dkgroot[AT]talon.nl>
    Hauke Mehrtens		<hauke[AT]hauke-m.de>
    0xBismarck		<0xbismarck[AT]gmail.com>
    Peter Van Eynde		<pevaneyn[AT]cisco.com>
    Marko Hrastovec		<marko.hrastovec[AT]sloveniacontrol.si>
    Mike Garratt		<mg.wireshark[AT]evn.co.nz>
    Fabio Tarabelloni	<fabio.tarabelloni[AT]reloc.it>
    Chas Williams		<chas[AT]cmf.nrl.navy.mil>
    Javier Godoy		<uce[AT]rjgodoy.com.ar>
    Matt Texier		<matthieu[AT]texier.tv>
    Linas Vepstas		<linasvepstas[AT]gmail.com>
    Simon Zhong		<szhong[AT]juniper.net>
    Bart Van Assche		<bvanassche[AT]acm.org>
    Peter Lemenkov		<lemenkov[AT]gmail.com>
    Karl Beldan		<karl.beldan[AT]gmail.com>
    Jiri Engelthaler	<engycz[AT]gmail.com>
    Stephen Ludin		<sludin[AT]ludin.org>
    Andreas Urke		<andurke[AT]gmail.com>
    Patrik Lundquist	<patrik.lundquist[AT]gmail.com>
    Mark Vitale		<mvitale[AT]sinenomine.net>
    Peter Wu		<peter[AT]lekensteyn.nl>
    Jerry Negele		<jerry.negele[AT]arrisi.com>
    Hannes Hofer		<hhofer[AT]barracuda.com>
    Luca Coelho		<luca[AT]coelho.fi>
    Masayuki Takemura	<masayuki.takemura[AT]gmail.com>
    Ed Beroset		<beroset[AT]mindspring.com>
    e.yimjia		<jy.m12.0[AT]gmail.com>
    Jonathon Jongsma	<jjongsma[AT]redhat.com>
    Zeljko Ancimer		<zancimer[AT]gmail.com>
    Deon van der Westhuysen	<deonvdw[AT]gmail.com>
    Ibrahim Can Yuce	<canyuce[AT]gmail.com>
    Robert Jongbloed	<robertj[AT]voxlucida.com.au>
    Pavel Moravec		<pmoravec[AT]redhat.com>
    Robert Long		<rlong[AT]sandia.gov>
    James Lynch		<lynch007[AT]gmail.com>
    Chidambaram Arunachalam	<carunach[AT]cisco.com>
    Joo Valverde		<joao.valverde[AT]tecnico.ulisboa.pt>
    Benot Canet		<benoit[AT]scylladb.com>
    Hkon ye Amundsen      <haakon.amundsen[AT]nordicsemi.no>
Jeffrey Wildman		<jeffrey.wildman@ll.mit.edu>


=head2 From git log

    Achuthan Paramanathan	<acp[AT]kamstrup.com>
    Adam Goldman		<adam.goldman[AT]intel.com>
    Adam Mitz		<mitza[AT]objectcomputing.com>
    Adam Mitz		<mitza[AT]ociweb.com>
    Adam Morrison		<adammo[AT]extrahop.com>
    Adam Pridgen		<adam.pridgen[AT]thecoverofnight.com>
    Adam Schwalm		<adam.schwalm[AT]dynetics.com>
    Adam Wujek		<adam.wujek[AT]cern.ch>
    Aditya Jain		<aditya.jain[AT]samsung.com>
    Adrian Granados		<adrian[AT]adriangranados.com>
    Adrian Simionov		<daniel.simionov[AT]gmail.com>
    Adrian-Ken Rueegsegger	<ken[AT]codelabs.ch>
    Adrien Aubry		<adraub[AT]gmail.com>
    Adrien Destugues	<adestugues[AT]toulouse.viveris.com>
    Adrien Destugues	<adrien.destugues[AT]opensource.viveris.fr>
    Ahmad Fatoum		<ahmad[AT]a3f.at>
    Ajay Panicker		<apanicke[AT]google.com>
    Alan Birtles		<alan.birtles[AT]eu.sony.com>
    Alan Partis		<alpartis[AT]thundernet.com>
    Aleksej Matis		<amat[AT]magure.de>
    Alex Badea		<abadea[AT]ixiacom.com>
    Alex Nik		<rage.iz.me[AT]gmail.com>
    Alex Sirr		<alexsirruw[AT]gmail.com>
    Alex Tessmer		<dev[AT]tessmer.me>
    AlexL			<loginov.alex.valer[AT]gmail.com>
    Alexander Couzens	<lynxis[AT]fe80.eu>
    Alexander Dahl		<ada[AT]thorsis.com>
    Alexander Gryanko	<xpahos[AT]gmail.com>
    Alexander Grtner	<sphinxs1988[AT]googlemail.com>
    Alexander Meier		<MeierAPunkt[AT]googlemail.com>
    Alexander Nogikh	<wp32pw[AT]gmail.com>
    Alexander Stein		<alexanders83[AT]web.de>
    Alexander Wetzel	<alexander.wetzel[AT]web.de>
    Alexandr Savca		<alexandr.savca89[AT]gmail.com>
    Alexis Green		<alexis.green[AT]nokia.com>
    Alfred Koebler		<alfred.koebler[AT]gmx.de>
    Ali Sabil		<ali.sabil[AT]koperadev.com>
    Alistair Leslie-Hughes	<leslie_alistair[AT]hotmail.com>
    Allan Mller Madsen	<almomadk[AT]gmail.com>
    Ambarish Malpani	<ambarish[AT]defend7.com>
    Ameya Deshpande		<ameya.181co205[AT]nitk.edu.in>
    Ameya Deshpande		<ameyanrd[AT]gmail.com>
    Ameya Deshpande		<ameyanrd[AT]outlook.com>
    Amine Kherbouche	<amine.kherbouche[AT]6wind.com>
    Amit Khatri		<amit7861234[AT]gmail.com>
    Amitoj Setia		<asetia[AT]juniper.net>
    Ana Pantar		<ana.pantar[AT]gmail.com>
    Anal Fiaux		<anael[AT]fiaux.org>
    Anders Esbensen		<Anders.Esbensen[AT]silabs.com>
    Andre Luyer		<andre[AT]luyer.nl>
    Andre Puschmann		<andre[AT]softwareradiosystems.com>
    Andreas Gruenbacher	<andreas.gruenbacher[AT]gmail.com>
    Andreas Karlsson	<se.nakarlsson[AT]gmail.com>
    Andreas Leibold		<andreas.leibold[AT]harman.com>
    Andreas Schultz		<andreas.schultz[AT]travelping.com>
    Andreas Stieger		<andreas.stieger[AT]gmx.de>
    Andreas Urke		<arurke[AT]netwurke.com>
    Andrei Cipu		<acipu[AT]ixiacom.com>
    Andrew Chernyh		<andrew.chernyh[AT]gmail.com>
    Andrew Hoag		<Andrew.Hoag[AT]aireon.com>
    Andrey Kulikov		<amdei[AT]cryptopro.ru>
    Andrey Tverd		<andr.tverd[AT]gmail.com>
    Andrii Vladyka		<a.vladyka[AT]ukr.net>
    Andy Ling		<Andy.Ling[AT]quantel.com>
    Andy Ling		<andy.ling[AT]s-a-m.com>
    Andy Zhao		<jinhzhx[AT]gmail.com>
    Angelos Drossos		<wireshark.develangel[AT]mail.drossos.de>
    Anil Kumar		<anilkumar911[AT]gmail.com>
    Anndy Ke		<anndymaktub[AT]yahoo.com.tw>
    Anthony Coddington	<anthony.coddington[AT]endace.com>
    Anthony Crawford	<anthony.r.crawford[AT]charter.com>
    Anton Butenko		<ant.butenko[AT]gmail.com>
    Anton Glukhov		<anton.a.glukhov[AT]gmail.com>
    Anton Kharchenko	<astotal[AT]gmail.com>
    Anton Thomasson		<anton.thomasson[AT]ericsson.com>
    Antony Bridle		<ant.bridle[AT]gmail.com>
    Apeksha Singhal		<apeksha.singhal[AT]gmail.com>
    Arjen Zonneveld		<arjen[AT]bz2.nl>
    Arnd Hannemann		<arnd[AT]arndnet.de>
    Artem Mygaiev		<joculator[AT]gmail.com>
    Artur Nowosielski	<artnowo[AT]gmail.com>
    Arvind Dalvi		<ardalvi[AT]outlook.in>
    Asaf Kave		<kaveasaf[AT]gmail.com>
    Ashish Shukla		<shukla.a[AT]gmail.com>
    Atli Gumundsson	<atli[AT]tern.is>
    Audric Schiltknecht	<audric.schiltknecht[AT]external.thalesaleniaspace.com>
    Aurelien Aptel		<aaptel[AT]suse.com>
    Aymeric Moizard		<amoizard[AT]gmail.com>
    Babak Farrokhi		<babak[AT]farrokhi.net>
    Balint Reczey		<rbalint[AT]ubuntu.com>
    Bartolo Otrit		<bartolootrit[AT]gmail.com>
    Baruch Siach		<baruch[AT]tkos.co.il>
    Basil			<addremover[AT]gmail.com>
    Bastien Bailly		<babassbailly[AT]free.fr>
    Baak Kalfa		<basakkalfa[AT]gmail.com>
    Ben Bass		<ben.bass[AT]metaswitch.com>
    Ben Burwell		<bburwell[AT]lutron.com>
    Ben Fox-Moore		<ben.foxmoore[AT]accelleran.com>
    Ben Huddleston		<ben.huddleston[AT]couchbase.com>
    Benjamin Aschenbrenner	<benjamin.aschenbrenner[AT]gmail.com>
    Benjamin Coddington	<bcodding[AT]redhat.com>
    Benjamin Hesmans	<benjamin.hesmans[AT]uclouvain.be>
    Benjamin Parzella	<bparzella[AT]gmail.com>
    Benjamin Roch		<benjamin.roch[AT]tttech.com>
    Benoit Grange		<benoit.grange[AT]gmail.com>
    Bert van Leeuwen	<bert.vanleeuwen[AT]gmail.com>
    Bertrand Bonnefoy-Claudet <bertrandbc[AT]gmail.com>
    Bharath Ravindranath	<bravindranath[AT]arista.com>
    Binh Trinh		<beango[AT]gmail.com>
    Birol Capa		<birol.capa[AT]siemens.com>
    Bjoern Riemer		<bjoern.riemer[AT]fokus.fraunhofer.de>
    Bjrn Ruytenberg	<bjorn[AT]bjornweb.nl>
    Bob Hinden		<bob.hinden[AT]gmail.com>
    Bob Kuo			<bobjkuo[AT]gmail.com>
    Boris Bochkarev		<Boris-Bochkaryov[AT]yandex.ru>
    Bradford Boyle		<bradford.d.boyle[AT]gmail.com>
    Brandon Enochs		<enochs.brandon[AT]gmail.com>
    Branislav Makan		<branislav.makan1994[AT]gmail.com>
    Brendan O'Connor	<brendan[AT]leviathansecurity.com>
    Brenton Rothchild	<brentonr[AT]dorm.org>
    Brian Whitney		<brian.m.whitney[AT]outlook.com>
    Britt McKinley		<bmckinley[AT]sonusnet.com>
    Bruno Verstuyft		<bruno.verstuyft[AT]excentis.com>
    Camille Gurin		<guerincamille56[AT]gmail.com>
    Carlo Carraro		<colrack[AT]gmail.com>
    Carlos Velasco		<carlos.velasco[AT]nimastelecom.com>
    Cathy Yang		<cathy.y.yang[AT]ericsson.com>
    Cedric Izoard		<cedric.izoard[AT]ceva-dsp.com>
    Cenk Gndoan		<cnkgndgn[AT]gmail.com>
    Cenk Gndoan		<mail+dev[AT]gundogan.net>
    Chaitanya T K		<chaitanya.mgit[AT]gmail.com>
    Chaoyong Zhou		<bgnvendor[AT]163.com>
    Charles Nepveu		<charles.nepveu[AT]verint.com>
    Charlie Lenahan		<clenahan[AT]sonicbison.com>
    Chema Gonzalez		<chemag[AT]gmail.com>
    Chris Brandson		<chris.brandson[AT]gmail.com>
    Chris Dunlop		<chris.dunlop3[AT]gmail.com>
    Chris Wills		<xenkrs[AT]outlook.com>
    Christian Ambach	<ambi[AT]samba.org>
    Christian Kreibich	<christian[AT]corelight.com>
    Christian Krump		<christian.krump[AT]br-automation.com>
    Christian Lamparter	<chunkeey[AT]googlemail.com>
    Christian M. Amsss	<chrysn[AT]fsfe.org>
    Christian Tellefsen	<chris-git[AT]tellefsen.net>
    Christian Ullrich	<chris[AT]chrullrich.net>
    Christoph Burger-Scheidlin <mail[AT]christoph.burger-scheidlin.name>
    Christoph Jhnigen	<nuabaranda[AT]web.de>
    Christoph Portner	<christoph.portner[AT]gmail.com>
    Christoph Schlosser	<christoph[AT]schlosser.xyz>
    Christoph Wurm		<wurm[AT]elastic.co>
    Christophe GUERBER	<christophe.guerber[AT]gmail.com>
    Christopher Farman	<christopher.farman[AT]couchbase.com>
    Christopher Kilgour	<techie[AT]whiterocker.com>
    Chuan He		<bupthc[AT]gmail.com>
    Chuck Craft		<bubbasnmp[AT]gmail.com>
    Chuck Lever		<chuck.lever[AT]oracle.com>
    Chugzilla		<chugzilla77[AT]gmail.com>
    Chun-Yeow Yeoh		<yeohchunyeow[AT]gmail.com>
    Claudius Zingerli	<czingerl[AT]gmail.com>
    Cody Doucette		<doucette[AT]bu.edu>
    Colin Foster		<colin.foster[AT]in-advantage.com>
    Colin Sames		<sames.colin[AT]gmail.com>
    Craig Jackson		<cejackson51[AT]gmail.com>
    Cdric Delmas		<cedricde[AT]outlook.fr>
    D. W. Poon		<dwpoon[AT]mail.ubc.ca>
    Daan De Meyer		<daan.j.demeyer[AT]gmail.com>
    Damir Franusic		<damir.franusic[AT]gmail.com>
    Dan Robertson		<danlrobertson89[AT]gmail.com>
    Dana Sy			<dana.hayden.sy[AT]gmail.com>
    Daniel Hirschberger	<daniel.hirschberger+wireshark[AT]rub.de>
    Daniel Kamil Kozar	<dkk089[AT]gmail.com>
    Daniel Mack		<daniel[AT]zonque.org>
    Daniel McLean		<maczor[AT]gmail.com>
    Daniel Mouscher		<dmouscher[AT]gmail.com>
    Daniel Stenberg		<daniel[AT]haxx.se>
    Daniel Tan		<BACdaBASpert[AT]optigo.net>
    Daniel Willmann		<dwillmann[AT]sysmocom.de>
    Daniele Lacamera	<daniele.lacamera[AT]technicolor.com>
    Danil van Eeden	<wireshark[AT]myname.nl>
    Darien Spencer		<cusneud[AT]mail.com>
    Darius Davis		<darius[AT]vmware.com>
    Darshan Nevgi		<darshan.sn[AT]samsung.com>
    Dave Barach		<dave[AT]barachs.net>
    Dave Goodell		<dave[AT]goodell.io>
    Dave Pifke		<dave[AT]pifke.org>
    Dave Rigby		<daver[AT]couchbase.com>
    Dave Tapuska		<dtapuska[AT]google.com>
    David Aggeler		<david_aggeler[AT]yahoo.com>
    David Ameiss		<david[AT]ameissnet.com>
    David Arnold		<d[AT]0x1.org>
    David Barrera		<davidbb[AT]gmail.com>
    David Bastiani		<daveb64[AT]yahoo.com>
    David Creswick		<dcrewi[AT]gyrae.net>
    David Kreitschmann	<dkreitschmann[AT]seemoo.tu-darmstadt.de>
    David McKay		<mckay.david[AT]gmail.com>
    David Morsberger	<dave[AT]morsberger.com>
    David Perry		<boolean263[AT]protonmail.com>
    David Perry		<d.perry[AT]utoronto.ca>
    David Snowdon		<daves[AT]metamako.com>
    David Tapuska		<dave[AT]tapuska.com>
    David Zoller		<zollerd[AT]gmail.com>
    Davide Caratti		<davide.caratti[AT]gmail.com>
    Deep Datta		<ddatta[AT]ixiacom.com>
    Deep Datta		<deep.datta[AT]keysight.com>
    Denis Janssen		<janssend[AT]gmail.com>
    Dennis Bush		<bush[AT]tcnj.edu>
    Dennis Lanov		<dennis.lanov[AT]gmail.com>
    Derick Rethans		<github[AT]derickrethans.nl>
    Devan Lai		<devanl[AT]davisinstruments.com>
    Devin Heitmueller	<dheitmueller[AT]kernellabs.com>
    Dhananjay Patki		<dhpatki[AT]cisco.com>
    Dhiru Kholia		<kholia[AT]kth.se>
    DiablosOffens		<DiablosOffens[AT]gmx.de>
    Didier Arenzana		<darenzana[AT]yahoo.fr>
    Didier Barvaux		<didier.barvaux[AT]toulouse.viveris.com>
    Diederik de Groot	<ddegroot[AT]talon.nl>
    Dieter Dobbelaere	<dieter.dobbelaere[AT]excentis.com>
    Dirk Eibach		<dirk.eibach[AT]gdsys.cc>
    Dirk Rmmen		<dirk.roemmen[AT]cslab.de>
    Dirk Weise		<code[AT]dirk-weise.de>
    Disha Daniel		<ddaniel[AT]empirix.com>
    Dmitriy Eliseev		<eliseev_d[AT]ntcees.ru>
    Dmitry Bravikov		<dmitry[AT]bravikov.pro>
    Dmitry Lazurkin		<dilaz03[AT]gmail.com>
    Dmitry Linikov		<linikov[AT]arrival.com>
    Dmitry Radivonchik	<mitya[AT]oktetlabs.ru>
    Dom Gifford		<Dominic.Gifford[AT]atmel.com>
    Dominic Chen		<d.c.ddcc[AT]gmail.com>
    Dongle Su		<agdsdl[AT]sina.com.cn>
    Doug Brown		<doug[AT]downtowndougbrown.com>
    Dr. Lars Voelker	<lars-github[AT]larsvoelker.de>
    Dr. Lars Vlker		<lars.voelker[AT]bmw.de>
    Dr. Lars Vlker		<lars.voelker[AT]technica-engineering.de>
    Dwayne Rich		<dwayne_rich[AT]selinc.com>
    Dylan Ulis		<daulis0[AT]gmail.com>
    Dniel Bakai		<bakaidl[AT]gmail.com>
    Ebben Aries		<exa[AT]fb.com>
    Ed Beroset		<beroset[AT]ieee.org>
    Ederson de Souza	<ederson.desouza[AT]intel.com>
    Edward Dao		<edmailbox[AT]gmail.com>
    Edward Smith		<edward.smith[AT]nowlegent.com>
    Edwin Groothuis		<edwin[AT]mavetju.org>
    Eelco Chaudron		<echaudro[AT]redhat.com>
    Eldon Stegall		<wireshark-gerrit[AT]eldondev.com>
    Eliot Lear		<lear[AT]cisco.com>
    Emery Hemingway		<emery[AT]vfemail.net>
    Emmanuel Grumbach	<emmanuel.grumbach[AT]intel.com>
    Enrique Giraldo		<enrique.giraldo[AT]wslw.es>
    Eric Anderson		<andersoe[AT]cs.cmu.edu>
    Eric Wang		<terminal_0[AT]aol.com>
    Eric Wetzel		<thewetzel[AT]gmail.com>
    Eric Wild		<ewild[AT]sysmocom.de>
    Erik de Jong		<erikdejong[AT]gmail.com>
    Erika Szelleova		<szelleerika[AT]gmail.com>
    Ethan Everett		<ethan.everett[AT]meraki.net>
    Ethan Young		<imfargo[AT]gmail.com>
    Etienne Dechamps	<etienne[AT]edechamps.fr>
    Etienne MARAIS		<etienne[AT]marais.green>
    Etienne Millon		<etienne[AT]cryptosense.com>
    Eugene Adell		<eugene.adell[AT]gmail.com>
    Eugene Exarevsky	<eugene.exarevsky[AT]dsr-company.com>
    Eugene Sukhodolin	<eugene[AT]sukhodolin.com>
    Evan Welsh		<noreply[AT]evanwelsh.com>
    Evelio Vila		<eveliovila[AT]gmail.com>
    Fabian Raetz		<fabian.raetz[AT]gmail.com>
    Fabrice Fontaine	<fontaine.fabrice[AT]gmail.com>
    Fabrizio Demaria	<fabrizio.demaria[AT]intel.com>
    Felix Ruess		<felix.ruess[AT]roboception.de>
    Filip Sohajek		<filip.sohajek[AT]gmail.com>
    Filipe Lans		<lains[AT]archlinux.org>
    Flavio Santes		<flavio.santes[AT]1byt3.com>
    Florian Adamsky		<fa-git[AT]haktar.org>
    Florian Bezold		<florian.bezold[AT]esrlabs.com>
    Florian Lohoff		<f[AT]zz.de>
    Francisco Javier Snchez-Roselly <franciscojavier.sanchezroselly[AT]ujaen.es>
    Francisco Jose Alvarez	<francisco.alvarez[AT]galgus.net>
    Francois Nguyen		<francois[AT]daily-prophet.org>
    Francois Schneider	<francois.schneider[AT]airbus.com>
    Francois-Xavier Le Bail	<fx.lebail[AT]yahoo.com>
    Frank Carpenter		<frank.carpenter[AT]spectralink.com>
    Franklin Mathieu	<franklinmathieu[AT]gmail.com>
    Gabor Vaszkun		<vaszkun[AT]gmail.com>
    Gabriel Ganne		<gabriel.ganne[AT]enea.com>
    Gandharav Katyal	<gandharav4ever[AT]gmail.com>
    Ganesh Nawsupe		<ganesh991[AT]gmail.com>
    Garming Sam		<garming[AT]catalyst.net.nz>
    Gene Cumm		<gene.cumm[AT]gmail.com>
    Georg Brandl		<georg[AT]python.org>
    Georg Richter		<georg[AT]mariadb.org>
    George Hopkins		<george-hopkins[AT]null.net>
    George Powers		<gpowers[AT]google.com>
    Gerard Garcia		<ggarcia[AT]deic.uab.cat>
    Gergely Nagy		<ngg[AT]ngg.hu>
    Gerhard KHUENY		<Gerhard.KHUENY[AT]bachmann.info>
    Gianluca Borello	<g.borello[AT]gmail.com>
    Gilles Dufour		<dufour.gilles[AT]gmail.com>
    Gizem Yurdagul		<gizemnuryurdagul[AT]gmail.com>
    Glenden Lee		<thornhillextreme[AT]gmail.com>
    Gloria Pozuelo		<gloria.pozuelo[AT]bics.com>
    Gordon Ross		<gordon.w.ross[AT]gmail.com>
    Graham Shanks		<graham.shanks[AT]blueyonder.co.uk>
    Greg Morris		<greg.morris[AT]microfocus.com>
    Gregor Beck		<gbeck[AT]sernet.de>
    Gregor Jasny		<gjasny[AT]googlemail.com>
    Gregor Jasny		<gregor.jasny[AT]logmein.com>
    Gregor Miernik		<gregor.miernik[AT]hytec.de>
    Guillaume Autran	<gautran[AT]clearpathrobotics.com>
    Guy Davies		<aguydavies[AT]gmail.com>
    Guy Harris		<gharris[AT]sonic.net>
    Gnther Deschner	<gd[AT]samba.org>
    Hal Rosenstock		<hal.rosenstock[AT]gmail.com>
    Hanspeter Portner	<dev[AT]open-music-kontrollers.ch>
    Harald Welte		<laforge[AT]osmocom.org>
    Hassan Sultan		<sultah[AT]amazon.com>
    Hauke Mehrtens		<hauke.mehrtens[AT]intel.com>
    Helmut Buchsbaum	<helmut.buchsbaum[AT]gmail.com>
    Herwin Weststrate	<herwin[AT]quarantainenet.nl>
    Hessam Jalali		<hessam.jalali[AT]gmail.com>
    Hiroaki KAWAI		<hiroaki.kawai[AT]gmail.com>
    Hiroshi Ioka		<hirochachacha[AT]gmail.com>
    Hitoshi Irino		<irino[AT]sfc.wide.ad.jp>
    Holger Hans Peter Freyther <holger[AT]moiji-mobile.com>
    IWASE Yusuke		<iwase.yusuke0[AT]gmail.com>
    Iain R. Learmonth	<irl[AT]fsfe.org>
    Ian Chard		<ian[AT]chard.org>
    Ido Schimmel		<idosch[AT]mellanox.com>
    Ignacio Martnez	<ignacio.martinez.rivera[AT]gmail.com>
    Igor Passchier		<igor.passchier[AT]tassinternational.com>
    Ike Gilbert		<ike[AT]imgilbert.com>
    Ilya Gavrilov		<ilya.dev[AT]gmail.com>
    Indraneel Guha		<indraneelg[AT]gmail.com>
    Ionut Ceausu		<ionut.ceausu[AT]gmail.com>
    Isaac Boukris		<iboukris[AT]gmail.com>
    Ismael Mendez Matamoros	<ismael[AT]rti.com>
    Ivan Ermakov		<iermakov[AT]yahoo.com>
    Ivan Nardi		<nardi.ivan[AT]gmail.com>
    Ivan Quach		<ivan.quach[AT]aireon.com>
    Ivan Secerin		<ivan.severin.m[AT]gmail.com>
    J. Bruce Fields		<bfields[AT]redhat.com>
    JC Wren			<jcwren[AT]jcwren.com>
    Jack Culhane		<jackculhane[AT]gmail.com>
    Jaime Caamao Ruiz	<jcaamano[AT]suse.com>
    Jakub Adam		<jakub.adam[AT]collabora.com>
    Jakub Pawlowski		<jpawlowski[AT]google.com>
    Jambukumar Kulandaivel	<jambukumar[AT]codeaurora.org>
    James Coleman		<jamesc[AT]dspsrv.com>
    James Ko		<jck[AT]exegin.com>
    Jamie Hare		<jamie.n.hare[AT]gmail.com>
    Jamil Nimeh		<jnimeh[AT]gmail.com>
    Jan Holthuis		<jan.holthuis[AT]ruhr-uni-bochum.de>
    Jan Kaisrlik		<j.kaisrlik[AT]seznam.cz>
    Jan Seda		<hodor[AT]hodor.cz>
    Jan Spevak		<jan.spevak[AT]nokia.com>
    Jan-Hendrik Bolte	<jabolte[AT]uos.de>
    Jano Svitok		<jsv[AT]whitestein.com>
    Jared Rittle		<jrittle[AT]cisco.com>
    Jason Cohen		<j.cohen[AT]f5.com>
    Jason Cohen		<kryojenik2[AT]gmail.com>
    Jason Heimann		<jheimann[AT]pertino.com>
    Jason Uher		<jason.uher[AT]jhuapl.edu>
    Jason Zhekov		<jasssonpet[AT]gmail.com>
    Javier Cardona		<jcardona[AT]fb.com>
    Jean Thomas		<jeanthomas[AT]sierrawireless.com>
    Jean-Philippe Lebel	<jpl[AT]ds.tools>
    Jeff Dyer		<jmasterfunk[AT]gmail.com>
    Jeff Layton		<jlayton[AT]redhat.com>
    Jeff Oconnell		<jeffo[AT]rulez.com>
    Jeff Widman		<jeff[AT]jeffwidman.com>
    Jeffrey Forhan		<jforhan[AT]cisco.com>
    Jeffrey Goff		<jgoff[AT]arubanetworks.com>
    Jeffrey Smith		<whydoubt[AT]gmail.com>
    Jens Kilian		<jens.kilian[AT]advantest.com>
    Jeremiejig		<me[AT]jeremiejig.fr>
    Jeremy Browne		<jer[AT]ifni.ca>
    Jeremy Hitt		<jeremy.hitt[AT]isilon.com>
    Jeremy Kerr		<jk[AT]ozlabs.org>
    Jeremy Martin		<boardermartin[AT]gmail.com>
    Jeroen Roovers		<jer[AT]gentoo.org>
    Jeroen Sack		<jeroen[AT]jeroensack.nl>
    Jesse Gross		<jesse[AT]kernel.org>
    Jiajun Wang		<me[AT]jiajunw.com>
    Jim Borden		<jim.borden[AT]couchbase.com>
    Jim Schaettle		<jimschaettle[AT]gmail.com>
    Jim Walker		<jim[AT]couchbase.com>
    Jim Young		<jim.young.ws[AT]gmail.com>
    Jim Young		<jyoung[AT]gsu.edu>
    Jiri Pirko		<jiri[AT]resnulli.us>
    Jo Rueschel		<wireshark[AT]rueschel.de>
    Joakim Andersson	<joakim.andersson[AT]nordicsemi.no>
    Joakim Karlsson		<oakimk[AT]gmail.com>
    Joakim Karlsson A	<joakim.a.karlsson[AT]ericsson.com>
    Joel Colledge		<joel.colledge[AT]linbit.com>
    Joeri de Ruiter		<joeri[AT]cypherpunk.nl>
    Johan Wahl		<johan.wahl[AT]ericsson.com>
    Johannes Altmanninger	<aclopte[AT]gmail.com>
    Johannes Singler	<johannes[AT]singler.name>
    John A. Thacker		<johnthacker[AT]gmail.com>
    John Bankier		<opensource.jbankier[AT]gmail.com>
    John Keeping		<john[AT]metanate.com>
    John Miner		<optommp[AT]gmail.com>
    John Serock		<serock-wireshark-dev[AT]outlook.com>
    John Tapparo		<j.tapparo[AT]f5.com>
    John Viklund		<john.viklund[AT]effnet.com>
    Jon DeVree		<nuxi[AT]vault24.org>
    Jon Dennis		<j.dennis[AT]cablelabs.com>
    Jonas Falkevik		<jonas.falkevik[AT]gmail.com>
    Jonas Jonsson		<jonas[AT]ludd.ltu.se>
    Jonathan Brucker	<jonathan.brucke[AT]gmail.com>
    Jonathan Fleming	<jonathan[AT]optigo.net>
    Jonathan Muoz		<jonathan.munoz[AT]inria.fr>
    Jordan Keister		<grokspawn[AT]gmail.com>
    Jorge Mora		<jmora1300[AT]gmail.com>
    Jorge Power		<jpower[AT]rsscorp.org>
    Jose Rubio		<joserubiovidales[AT]gmail.com>
    Josef Baumgartner	<josef.baumgartner[AT]br-automation.com>
    Joseph Huffman		<jhuffman[AT]codeaurora.org>
    Josip Medved		<jmedved[AT]jmedved.com>
    Josselin VALLET		<josselin.vallet[AT]toulouse.viveris.com>
    Juan Jose Martin Carrascosa <juanjo[AT]rti.com>
    Juan Matias		<jmrepetti[AT]gmail.com>
    Juan Pablo Mendoza	<jpablo[AT]gmail.com>
    Juergen Kosel		<juergen.kosel[AT]gmx.de>
    Juhani Puurula		<juhani.puurula[AT]arm.com>
    Julian Cable		<julian.cable[AT]yahoo.com>
    Julian Renz		<julian[AT]renz.cloud>
    Julien STAUB		<atsju2[AT]yahoo.fr>
    Jun Wang		<sdn_app[AT]163.com>
    Junpei Yoshino		<junpei.yoshino[AT]gmail.com>
    Justin Dailey		<justin[AT]mti-systems.com>
    Justin Helgesen		<justinhelgesen[AT]gmail.com>
    Justin J. Novack	<jnovack[AT]gmail.com>
    JustinKu		<jiunrong[AT]gmail.com>
    Jrme LAFORGE		<jerome.laforge[AT]gmail.com>
    Ka-Shu Wong		<kswong[AT]exablaze.com>
    Karl Knoebl		<karl.knoebl[AT]technikum-wien.at>
    Kary Rogers		<kary.rogers[AT]gmail.com>
    Kasper Deng		<kasper.deng[AT]ericsson.com>
    Keith Scott		<keithlscott[AT]gmail.com>
    Ken Aaker		<kenaaker[AT]gmail.com>
    Kenneth Soerensen	<knnthsrnsn[AT]gmail.com>
    Kenny Root		<kenny[AT]the-b.org>
    Kevin A. Noll		<kevinanoll[AT]gmail.com>
    Kevin Bracey		<kevin.bracey[AT]arm.com>
    Kevin Cernekee		<cernekee[AT]chromium.org>
    Kevin Grigorenko	<kevin.grigorenko[AT]us.ibm.com>
    Kevin Hausman		<kevin.hausman[AT]sentaca.com>
    Kevin Herron		<kevinherron[AT]gmail.com>
    Kevin Hogan		<kwabena[AT]google.com>
    Khalifa NDIAYE		<khalifa.ndiaye[AT]orange.com>
    Kim Bckstrm		<kim.backstrom[AT]gmail.com>
    Kirill Chernyshov	<nideff.ru[AT]gmail.com>
    Krunal Soni		<krunaldsoni[AT]gmail.com>
    Krzysztof Opasiak	<k.opasiak[AT]samsung.com>
    Lajos Olah		<lajos.olah.jr[AT]gmail.com>
    Lars Christensen	<larsch[AT]belunktum.dk>
    Lars Sundstrm		<lars.x.sundstrom[AT]ericsson.com>
    Lasse Luttermann Poulsen <lasse.luttermann[AT]gmail.com>
    Laszlo Papp		<laszlo.papp[AT]hubersuhner.com>
    Laurenz Kamp		<laurenz.kamp[AT]gmx.de>
    Lee Mitchell		<lee[AT]indigopepper.com>
    Lee Serin		<serinee95[AT]gmail.com>
    Lev Stipakov		<lstipakov[AT]gmail.com>
    Lichen Liu		<llc123456a[AT]gmail.com>
    Lin Sun			<lin.sun[AT]zoom.us>
    Loganaden Velvindron	<logan[AT]cyberstorm.mu>
    Lorenzo Vannucci	<vannucci[AT]ntop.org>
    Lotte Steenbrink	<lotte[AT]zombietetris.de>
    Luca Melette		<luca[AT]srlabs.de>
    Lucas Simopoulos	<lsimopoulos[AT]gmail.com>
    Ludovic Cintrat		<l.cintrat[AT]traxens.com>
    Luis Rosa		<lmrosa[AT]dei.uc.pt>
    Lukas Emersberger	<lukas.emersberger[AT]gmail.com>
    Luke Chou		<luke.chou[AT]gmail.com>
    Luke Lynch		<llynch2017[AT]my.fit.edu>
    Luke Mewburn		<luke[AT]mewburn.net>
    Lutz Kresge		<LutzKr[AT]protonmail.ch>
    Lo Gaspard		<leo[AT]gaspard.io>
    Maarten Bezemer		<maarten.bezemer[AT]gmail.com>
    Magnus Henoch		<magnus.henoch[AT]gmail.com>
    Maka0			<Maka0[AT]yurei.net>
    Makoto Shimamura	<makoto.shimamura[AT]toshiba.co.jp>
    Maksim Salau		<maksim.salau[AT]gmail.com>
    Malcolm Walters		<malcolm.walters[AT]acano.com>
    Malia Vuini		<malishav[AT]gmail.com>
    Manfred			<mx2927[AT]gmail.com>
    Marc Bevand		<mbevand[AT]google.com>
    Marc Fournier		<marc.fournier[AT]camptocamp.com>
    Marcel Essig		<marcel.essig[AT]gmx.de>
    Marcelo Ricardo Leitner	<marcelo.leitner[AT]gmail.com>
    Marcin Rokicki		<marcin.rokicki[AT]gmail.com>
    Marcus Sundberg		<marcus.sundberg[AT]aptilo.com>
    Marian urkovi		<md[AT]bts.sk>
    Marie Janssen		<jamuraa[AT]google.com>
    Marios Makassikis	<mmakassikis[AT]gmail.com>
    Marius Paliga		<marius.paliga[AT]gmail.com>
    Mariusz Zaborski	<oshogbo[AT]vexillium.org>
    Mark Ciechanowski	<markciechanowski[AT]gmail.com>
    Mark Cunningham		<launchpad[AT]markcunningham.ie>
    Mark Phillips		<mark.s.phillips[AT]outlook.com>
    Mark Weel		<markweel[AT]hotmail.com>
    Markku Leini		<markku[AT]iki.fi>
    Marko Hrastovec		<marko.hrastovec[AT]gmail.com>
    Markus Becker		<markus.becker[AT]tridonic.com>
    Marouen Ghodhbane	<marouen.ghodhbane[AT]nxp.com>
    Martin			<martin.lutz[AT]gmail.com>
    Martin Boye Petersen	<martinboyepetersen[AT]gmail.com>
    Martin Fesser		<martin.fesser[AT]allegro-packets.com>
    Martin Heusse		<martin.heusse[AT]imag.fr>
    Martin Mathieson	<martin.mathieson[AT]keysight.com>
    Martin Sehnoutka	<msehnout[AT]redhat.com>
    Martin Tibensk		<martin.tibensky[AT]alcatel-lucent.com>
    Martin Vit		<martin[AT]voipmonitor.org>
    Masashi Honma		<masashi.honma[AT]gmail.com>
    Matej Kok		<5764c029b688c1c0d24a2e97cd764f[AT]gmail.com>
    Matej Tkac		<matej.tkac.mt[AT]gmail.com>
    Mathias Kurth		<mathias.kurth[AT]commsolid.com>
    Mathy Vanhoef		<Mathy.Vanhoef[AT]nyu.edu>
    Matt Carabine		<matt.carabine[AT]hotmail.co.uk>
    Matt Lawrence		<bugzilla.wireshark[AT]erisa.co.uk>
    Matt Parker		<matt.parker[AT]poly.com>
    Matt Porter		<mporter[AT]konsulko.com>
    Matthew Weant		<msweant[AT]gmail.com>
    Matthias Lang		<matthias[AT]corelatus.com>
    Matthieu Coudron	<matthieu.coudron[AT]lip6.fr>
    Max Dmitrichenko	<dmitrmax[AT]gmail.com>
    Maxim Kropp		<maxim.kropp[AT]hotmail.de>
    Maxim Sharabayko	<maxim.sharabayko[AT]gmail.com>
    Maximilian Kohler	<maximilian.kohler[AT]viavisolutions.com>
    Mehmet Oguz Sakaoglu	<mehmet.oguz.mnz[AT]gmail.com>
    Merlin Chlosta		<merlin.chlosta+gnuradio[AT]ruhr-uni-bochum.de>
Micha Reiser		<michafamreiser.ch>
    Michael Adam		<obnox[AT]samba.org>
    Michael Bouchaud (yoz)	<michael.bouchaud[AT]toulouse.viveris.com>
    Michael Cistera		<michael.cistera[AT]netscout.com>
    Michael Honsel		<lesnoh[AT]gmx.de>
    Michael Mann		<Michael.Mann[AT]jbtc.com>
    Michael McConville	<mmcco[AT]mykolab.com>
    Michael McTernan	<mike.mcternan[AT]wavemobile.com>
    Michael Oed		<michael.oed[AT]gmail.com>
    Michael Penick		<penick[AT]gmail.com>
    Michael Pergament	<mpergament[AT]googlemail.com>
    Michael Schmitt		<mschmitt[AT]fastmail.net>
    Michael Sweet		<michael.r.sweet[AT]gmail.com>
    Michael Vigovsky	<upliner[AT]gmail.com>
    Michail Koreshkov	<drkor[AT]hotbox.ru>
    Michal Kubecek		<mkubecek[AT]suse.cz>
    Michal Pazdera		<michal.pazdera[AT]gmail.com>
    Michal Prvoznk	<mprivozn[AT]redhat.com>
    Michal Ruprich		<michalruprich[AT]gmail.com>
    Michal Slavka		<slavka.michal[AT]gmail.com>
    Michalis Kapsalakis	<kapsalis1989[AT]gmail.com>
    Michal Bouchaud	<michael.bouchaud[AT]external.thalesaleniaspace.com>
    Michal Bouchaud	<michael.bouchaud[AT]gmail.com>
    Micha Skalski		<mskalski13[AT]gmail.com>
    Michele Baldessari	<michele[AT]acksyn.org>
    Miguel Company		<MiguelCompany[AT]eprosima.com>
    Mihai Codrean		<mihaicodrean[AT]gmail.com>
    Mikael Kanstrup		<mikael.kanstrup[AT]gmail.com>
    Mike Frysinger		<vapier[AT]chromium.org>
    Mike Gerschefske	<msgersch2[AT]gmail.com>
    Mike Lugo		<mlugo.apx[AT]gmail.com>
    Mike Morrin		<morrinmike[AT]gmail.com>
    Mike Ryan		<mikeryan[AT]lacklustre.net>
    Mikhail Gusarov		<dottedmag[AT]dottedmag.net>
    Milan Stute		<mstute[AT]seemoo.tu-darmstadt.de>
    Milos Jovanovic		<jeyem815[AT]gmail.com>
    Miltos Patsiouras	<mipatsio[AT]gmail.com>
    Minh Phan		<phanducnhatminh[AT]gmail.com>
    Mirko Parthey		<mirko.parthey[AT]web.de>
    Moraney Jalil		<moraney.jalil[AT]outlook.com>
    Morten Tryfoss		<morten[AT]tryfoss.no>
    Moshe Kaplan		<me[AT]moshekaplan.com>
    Nathan Cole		<nath[AT]thecoleresidence.co.uk>
    Nathan Houghton		<nathan[AT]brainwerk.org>
    Nathaniel Clark		<Nathaniel.Clark[AT]misrule.us>
    Nathaniel Clark		<nathaniel.l.clark[AT]intel.com>
    Neels Hofmeyr		<neels[AT]hofmeyr.de>
    Neil Ostroff		<neil[AT]mangosoup.com>
    Niall Dugera		<niall.dugera[AT]anam.com>
    Nick Bedbury		<npbedbur[AT]syr.edu>
    Nick Calus		<ncalus[AT]nalys-group.com>
    Nick Carter		<ncarter100[AT]gmail.com>
    Nick James		<mookito[AT]tuta.io>
    Nick Lowe		<nick.lowe[AT]gmail.com>
    Nicolas BERTIN		<nicolas.bertin[AT]al-enterprise.com>
    Nicolas Cavallari	<nicolas.cavallari[AT]green-communications.fr>
    Nicolas Darchis		<ndarchis[AT]cisco.com>
    Nicolas S. Dade		<nic.dade[AT]gmail.com>
    Nikhil Acharya Prakash	<nikhilap[AT]arista.com>
    Nikita Ryaskin		<nikita.ryaskin[AT]dsr-corporation.com>
    Nikolai Ipatyev		<wallprime[AT]yandex.com>
    Nikolay Kovtun		<nikolay.kovtun[AT]dsr-corporation.com>
    Nils Bjrklund		<nils.bjorklund[AT]effnet.com>
    Nils Ohlmeier		<github[AT]ohlmeier.org>
    Nitzan Carmi		<nitzanc[AT]mellanox.com>
    Noel Power		<noel.power[AT]suse.com>
    Nora Sandler		<nsandler[AT]securityinnovation.com>
    Odysseus Yang		<wiresharkyyh[AT]outlook.com>
    Olaf Bergmann		<bergmann[AT]tzi.org>
    Olaf Flaschel		<olaf.flaschel[AT]vestifi.de>
    Olga Kornievskaia	<kolga[AT]netapp.com>
    Oliver			<cellotape[AT]gmail.com>
    Oliver Downard		<oliver.downard[AT]couchbase.com>
    Oliver Smith		<osmith[AT]sysmocom.de>
    Olivier Verriest	<verri[AT]x25.pm>
    Oren Koler		<clicker78[AT]gmail.com>
    Orgad Shaneh		<orgad.shaneh[AT]audiocodes.com>
    Orgad Shaneh		<orgads[AT]gmail.com>
    Oscar Gonzalez de Dios	<oscar.gonzalezdedios[AT]telefonica.com>
    Osman Sakalla		<osman.sakalla[AT]ericsson.com>
    Owen Williams		<williams.owen[AT]gmail.com>
    PHO			<pho[AT]cielonegro.org>
    Paolo Abeni		<pabeni[AT]redhat.com>
    Paolo Abeni		<paolo.abeni[AT]gmail.com>
    Parav Pandit		<paravpandit[AT]yahoo.com>
    Pascal Artho		<pascalartho[AT]gmail.com>
    Pascal Quantin		<pascal[AT]wireshark.org>
    Pascal S. de Kloe	<pascal[AT]quies.net>
    Patrice Fournier	<patrice.fournier[AT]ifax.com>
    Patricia Lindner	<plindner6912[AT]gmail.com>
    Patrick MacArthur	<pmacarth[AT]iol.unh.edu>
    Patrick Servello	<patrick.servello[AT]gmail.com>
    Patrik Moko		<patrikmosko95[AT]gmail.com>
    Patryk Nowak		<patryk.nowak[AT]tieto.com>
    Pau Espin Pedrol	<pespin[AT]sysmocom.de>
    Paul Aurich		<paul[AT]darkrain42.org>
    Paul Chambon		<pchambon[AT]toulouse.viveris.com>
    Paul Emge		<paul.emge[AT]digidescorp.com>
    Paul Offord		<paul.offord[AT]advance7.com>
    Paul Thomas		<pthomas8589[AT]gmail.com>
    Paul Williamson		<paul[AT]mustbeart.com>
    Paul Zander		<p.j.zander[AT]lighting.com>
    PaulThompson		<lankygitster[AT]gmail.com>
    Paulo Roberto Brando	<betobrandao[AT]gmail.com>
    Pavel Karneliuk		<pavel_karneliuk[AT]epam.com>
    Pavel Moravec		<mgr.pavel[AT]gmail.com>
    Pavel Odintsov		<pavel.odintsov[AT]gmail.com>
    Pavel Strnad		<strnadp[AT]tiscali.cz>
    Pavlos Antoniou		<pant[AT]intracom-telecom.com>
    Pedro Jose Marron	<pjmarron[AT]locoslab.com>
    Pedro Malagon		<malagon[AT]die.upm.es>
    Peng Li			<seudut[AT]gmail.com>
    Peng Tao		<tao.peng[AT]primarydata.com>
    Peter Hamilton		<qmear55[AT]protonmail.com>
    Peter Krystad		<peter.krystad[AT]linux.intel.com>
    Peter Membrey		<peter[AT]membrey.hk>
    Peter Oettig		<peter.oettig[AT]1und1.de>
    Peter Ross		<peter.ross[AT]dsto.defence.gov.au>
    Petr Gotthard		<petr.gotthard[AT]honeywell.com>
    Petr Janecek		<janecek[AT]ucw.cz>
    Petr Stuchlk		<stuchl4n3k[AT]gmail.com>
    Petr Sumbera		<petr.sumbera[AT]oracle.com>
    Petr tetiar		<petr.stetiar[AT]gaben.cz>
    Phil Beeson		<bugzilla[AT]philbeeson.com>
    Philip Rosenberg-Watt	<p.rosenberg-watt[AT]cablelabs.com>
    Philipp Hancke		<fippo[AT]andyet.net>
    Pino Toscano		<pino[AT]debian.org>
    Piotr Pawowski		<ppiotru[AT]gmail.com>
    Piotr Sarna		<sarna[AT]scylladb.com>
    Piotr Smolinski		<piotr.smolinski[AT]confluent.io>
    Piotr Tulpan		<piotr.tulpan[AT]netscan.pl>
    Piotr Winiarczyk	<wino45[AT]gmail.com>
    Poornima G		<pgurusid[AT]redhat.com>
    Prashanth Pai		<ppai[AT]redhat.com>
    Prerit Jain		<prerit.jain[AT]gmail.com>
    Prerit Jain		<prerit.jain[AT]samsung.com>
    Prince Paul		<prince.paul.k[AT]gmail.com>
    Priyanka Mondal		<priyanka02010[AT]gmail.com>
    Radhashyam Behera	<radhashyambehera[AT]gmail.com>
    Rado Radoulov		<rad0x6f[AT]gmail.com>
    Rafa Kunia		<rafal.kuznia[AT]protonmail.com>
    Rainer Keller		<Rainer.Keller[AT]qt.io>
    Ralf Nasilowski		<Ralf.Nasilowski[AT]ise.de>
    Ralph Boehme		<slow[AT]samba.org>
    Rasmus Jonsson		<wasmus[AT]zom.bi>
    Ray Gomez		<rayvincent.gomez[AT]gmail.com>
    Rediet			<getachew.redieteab[AT]orange.com>
    Remi Gacogne		<remi.gacogne[AT]powerdns.com>
    Remous-Aris Koutsiamanis <aris[AT]ariskou.com>
    Rene Nielsen		<rene.nielsen[AT]microchip.com>
    Ricardo Cristian Ramirez <r.cristian.ramirez[AT]gmail.com>
    Rich Coe		<richcoe2[AT]gmail.com>
    Richard Kuemmel		<kuemmel.ric[AT]googlemail.com>
    Richard Laager		<rlaager[AT]wiktel.com>
    Richard Smith		<pcy190[AT]126.com>
    Rickard Holmberg	<rickard[AT]avkrok.net>
    Rishi Dev Singh		<rishi.dev[AT]samsung.com>
    Robert Beardsworth	<rob_beardsworth[AT]hotmail.com>
    Robert Cragie		<robert.cragie[AT]gmail.com>
    Robert P		<tehownt[AT]gmail.com>
    Robert Sauter		<sauter[AT]locoslab.com>
    Rody Liu		<rody.liu[AT]ericsson.com>
    Roger Light		<roger[AT]atchoo.org>
    Rohan Saini		<rohan.saini[AT]nokia.com>
    Roland Haenel		<roland[AT]haenel.me>
    Roland Knall		<rknall[AT]gmail.com>
    Romain Tartire		<romain[AT]blogreen.org>
    Roman Koshelev		<roman.koshelev[AT]bk.ru>
    Roman Leonhartsberger	<ro.leonhartsberger[AT]gmail.com>
    Roman Volkov		<volkoff_roman[AT]ukr.net>
    Ronen Boazi		<ronen.boazi[AT]intel.com>
    Ross Jacobs		<rossbjacobs[AT]gmail.com>
    Roy Chateau		<chateau.royw[AT]gmail.com>
    Rudra Rugge		<rrugge[AT]juniper.net>
    Rui ZHANG		<rzhang[AT]grandstream.cn>
    Russel Howe		<russel[AT]appliedinvention.com>
    Russell Lowes		<russelll[AT]metamako.com>
    Rustam Safargalin	<rustam.safargalin[AT]sifox.ru>
    Ryan Mullen		<rmmullen[AT]gmail.com>
    Rmy Lone		<remy.leone[AT]gmail.com>
    Saku Ytti		<saku[AT]ytti.fi>
    Sam Cisneros		<Sam.Cisneros15[AT]protonmail.com>
    Samiran Saha		<ssahasamiran[AT]gmail.com>
    Sandeep Dahiya		<sdahiya[AT]gmail.com>
    Sander Steffann		<sander[AT]steffann.nl>
    Sanket Godbole		<sanket.godbole[AT]spirent.com>
    Sawssen Hadded		<saw.hadded[AT]gmail.com>
    Sayuri Mizushima	<yamaguchi55[AT]protonmail.ch>
    Scott Deandrea		<sdeandrea[AT]apple.com>
    Sebastian Kloeppel	<sk[AT]nakedape.net>
    Sebastian Schildt	<sebastian[AT]frozenlight.de>
    Selva Kumar		<v.selvamuthukumar[AT]gmail.com>
    Selvamegala		<sselvamegala[AT]gmail.com>
    Sergey Avseyev		<sergey.avseyev[AT]gmail.com>
    Sergey Bogdanov		<Sergey.Bogdanov[AT]astrosoft.ru>
    Sergey Rak		<sergrak[AT]iotecha.com>
    Sergio Moreno Mozota	<sergio.morenomozota[AT]telefonica.com>
    Seth Alexander		<seth.alexander[AT]cosmicaes.com>
    Sharvil Nanavati	<sharvil[AT]playground.global>
    Shekhar Chandra		<ranushekhar[AT]gmail.com>
    Shinjo Park		<peremen[AT]gmail.com>
    Shoichi Sakane		<wireshark-shoichi[AT]tanu.org>
    Shu Shen		<shu.shen[AT]gmail.com>
    Shuai Xiao		<iamhihi[AT]gmail.com>
    Shudong Zhou		<shudongzhou[AT]gmail.com>
    Signat Sibirskiy	<ord.blant[AT]gmail.com>
    Silvio Gissi		<silvio.gissi[AT]gmail.com>
    Simon Barber		<simon.barber[AT]meraki.net>
    Simon Graham		<simgrxp[AT]gmail.com>
    Simon Long		<hobei[AT]whitedoor.plus.com>
    Simon Vans-Colina	<simon[AT]monzo.com>
    Simon Zhong		<szhong.jnpr[AT]gmail.com>
    Slava Bacherikov	<slava[AT]bacher09.org>
    Slava Shwartsman	<slavash[AT]mellanox.com>
    Solganik Alexander	<solganik[AT]gmail.com>
    Sontol Bonggol		<sonbonggol[AT]gmail.com>
    Soumya Koduri		<skoduri[AT]redhat.com>
    Steev Klimaszewski	<threeway[AT]gmail.com>
    Stefan Battmer		<stefan.battmer[AT]matrix-vision.de>
    Stefan Doehla		<stefan.doehla[AT]iis.fraunhofer.de>
    Stefan Hajnoczi		<stefanha[AT]redhat.com>
    Stefan Pschel		<github[AT]basicmaster.de>
    Stefan Tatschner	<stefan[AT]rumpelsepp.org>
    Stefan Vlkel		<sv[AT]its-v.de>
    Stella Randall		<stella.randall[AT]emeerson.com>
    Stephan Kappertz	<octopus.sk[AT]googlemail.com>
    Stephane Bryant		<stephane.ml.bryant[AT]gmail.com>
    Stephen Donnelly	<stephen.donnelly[AT]endace.com>
    Steve Osselton		<steve.osselton[AT]gmail.com>
    Sultan Qasim Khan	<sultan.qasimkhan[AT]nccgroup.com>
    Sunil Mushran		<sunil.mushran[AT]oracle.com>
    Sven Eckelmann		<sven[AT]open-mesh.com>
    Sven Schnelle		<svens[AT]stackframe.org>
    Swapnil Roy		<swapnil.advent[AT]gmail.com>
    Sylvain Munaut		<tnt[AT]246tNt.com>
    Sbastien Deronne	<sebastien.deronne[AT]gmail.com>
    Sbastien RAILLARD	<sr[AT]coexsi.fr>
    T. Scholz		<scholzt234[AT]googlemail.com>
    Tadeusz Struk		<tadeusz.struk[AT]intel.com>
    Tadeusz Struk		<tstruk[AT]gmail.com>
    Taisuke Sasaki		<taisasak[AT]cisco.com>
    Tamir Duberstein	<tamird[AT]google.com>
    Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa	<tatsuhiro.t[AT]gmail.com>
    Tengfei Chang		<tengfei.chang[AT]inria.fr>
    Teyut			<teyut[AT]free.fr>
    Thibault Gerondal	<github[AT]tycale.be>
    Thies Moeller		<thies.moeller[AT]baslerweb.com>
    Thiyagarajan P		<psvthiyagarajan[AT]gmail.com>
    Thomas Chen		<funorpain[AT]gmail.com>
    Thomas Klausner		<tk[AT]giga.or.at>
    Thomas Portassau	<thomas.portassau[AT]hotmail.fr>
    Thomas Shen		<thomashen[AT]gmail.com>
    Thomas Vogt		<gitwiresharktv[AT]ist-einmalig.de>
    Thomas d'Otreppe	<tdotreppe[AT]aircrack-ng.org>
    Tigran Mkrtchyan	<tigran.mkrtchyan[AT]desy.de>
    Tim (Thanh) Nguyen	<tnnguyen[AT]broadcom.com>
    Tim Cuthbertson		<tim[AT]gfxmonk.net>
    Tim Furlong		<tim.furlong[AT]gmail.com>
    Timo Warns		<timow+github[AT]DiningPhilosopher.DE>
    Timothy Geiser		<slimshady007[AT]inbox.lv>
    Tobias Brunner		<tobias[AT]strongswan.org>
    Tobias Mueller		<muelli[AT]cryptobitch.de>
    Tobias Rasmusson	<tobias.rasmusson[AT]gmail.com>
    Tobias Stoeckmann	<tobias[AT]stoeckmann.org>
    Tom			<tom916[AT]qq.com>
    Tom Haynes		<loghyr[AT]hammerspace.com>
    Tom Haynes		<loghyr[AT]primarydata.com>
    Tom Nisbet		<t.talk[AT]nisbethome.com>
    Tom Yan			<tom.yan[AT]nokia-sbell.com>
    Tomas Konecny		<tomas.konecny[AT]eldis.cz>
    Tomas Kukosa		<kukosa[AT]herman.cz>
    Tomas Kukosa		<tkeksa[AT]gmail.com>
    Tomas Kukosa		<tomas.kukosa[AT]ixperta.com>
    Tomas Liscak		<tomas.liscak[AT]nokia.com>
    Tony Ciavarella		<tony.ciavarella[AT]squalllinesoftware.com>
    Topi Miettinen		<toiwoton[AT]gmail.com>
    Trond Myklebust		<trond.myklebust[AT]primarydata.com>
    Trond Norbye		<trond[AT]couchbase.com>
    Ulf			<ulf33286[AT]gmail.com>
    Uli Schlachter		<psychon[AT]znc.in>
    Umberto Corponi		<umberto.corponi[AT]athonet.com>
    Uri Simchoni		<urisimchoni[AT]gmail.com>
    Uwe Kleine-Knig	<uwe[AT]kleine-koenig.org>
    Vadim Fedorenko		<vadimjunk[AT]gmail.com>
    Vadim Yanitskiy		<axilirator[AT]gmail.com>
    Vadim Yanitskiy		<vyanitskiy[AT]sysmocom.de>
    ValdikSS		<iam[AT]valdikss.org.ru>
    Valentin Vidic		<Valentin.Vidic[AT]CARNet.hr>
    Vanson Lim		<vlim[AT]cisco.com>
    Vasil Velichkov		<vvvelichkov[AT]gmail.com>
    Victor Barratault	<victor.barratault[AT]gmail.com>
    Victor Dodon		<dodonvictor[AT]gmail.com>
    Victor Voronkov		<victor.voronkov[AT]gmail.com>
    Vidar Madsen		<vidarino[AT]gmail.com>
    Vik			<vkp129+ubuntu[AT]gmail.com>
    Vikhyat Umrao		<vumrao[AT]redhat.com>
    Vikram Hegde		<vikram.h[AT]samsung.com>
    Ville Skytt		<ville.skytta[AT]iki.fi>
    Vincent Helfre		<vincent.helfre[AT]gmx.net>
    Vincenzo Reale		<smart2128[AT]baslug.org>
    Vivek Pandey		<vivek_pandey[AT]comcast.com>
    Vladimir Kondratiev	<qca_vkondrat[AT]qca.qualcomm.com>
    Vladimir Rutsky		<rutsky[AT]google.com>
    Vladislav Grishenko	<themiron[AT]mail.ru>
    Vladlen Popov		<vladlen.popov[AT]yahoo.com>
    Volker Lendecke		<vl[AT]samba.org>
    Volodymyr Khomenko	<Khomenko.Volodymyr[AT]gmail.com>
    Volodymyr Khomenko	<volodymyr[AT]vastdata.com>
    Volodymyr Veskera	<volodymyrv[AT]interfacemasters.com>
    Warren Moxam		<warrenmptgrey[AT]gmail.com>
    Wasim Abu Moch		<wasim[AT]mellanox.com>
    Weston Andros Adamson	<dros[AT]primarydata.com>
    Weston Schmidt		<weston_schmidt[AT]alumni.purdue.edu>
    Will Glynn		<will[AT]willglynn.com>
    Will Robertson		<aliask[AT]gmail.com>
    William Tu		<u9012063[AT]gmail.com>
    Xavier Brouckaert	<xabrouck[AT]cisco.com>
    Xiaochuan Sun		<linuxvxworks[AT]gmail.com>
    Xiaoxia Lang		<xxlang[AT]grandstream.cn>
    Xu			<alvin.xu[AT]nokia-sbell.com>
    XuNiu			<993273596[AT]qq.com>
    YFdyh000		<yfdyh000[AT]gmail.com>
    Yan Burman		<yanb[AT]mellanox.com>
    Yang Luo		<hsluoyz[AT]qq.com>
    Yann Diorcet		<yann[AT]diorcet.fr>
    Yann Garcia		<yann.garcia[AT]fscom.frSkype>
    Yann Lejeune		<ylejeune[AT]netyl.org>
    Yann Pomarde		<yann.pomarede[AT]gmail.com>
    Yannik Enss		<Yannik.Enss[AT]rohde-schwarz.com>
    Yasuyuki Tanaka		<yasuyuki.tanaka[AT]inria.fr>
    Yehonatan Zecharia	<yonti95[AT]gmail.com>
    Yoshihiro Ueda		<uyoshihiro[AT]users.noreply.gitlab.com>
    Yoshiyuki Kurauchi	<ahochauwaaaaa[AT]gmail.com>
    Yuri Chislov		<yuri.chislov[AT]gmail.com>
    Yurii Lysyi		<yurii.lysyi[AT]ericsson.com>
    Yury Gargay		<yury.gargay[AT]gmail.com>
    Zachary Holcomb		<zholcomb2017[AT]my.fit.edu>
    Zdenk ambersk	<zzdevel[AT]seznam.cz>
    Zhao Lin		<zlbinghamton[AT]gmail.com>
    Zhenhua Hu		<fattiger1102[AT]gmail.com>
    akuchekar		<akuchekar[AT]empirix.com>
    anonsvn			<anonsvn[AT]localhost>
    atul358			<atul358[AT]gmail.com>
    cff339			<cff339[AT]gmail.com>
    cheloftus		<cheloftus[AT]gmail.com>
    dennisschagt		<dennisschagt[AT]gmail.com>
    eckart haug		<wireshark[AT]syntacs.com>
    ishaangandhi		<ishaangandhi[AT]gmail.com>
    jfp_martin		<john[AT]purplemeanie.co.uk>
    kardam			<netkardam[AT]gmail.com>
    kkoizumi		<kkoizumi46[AT]gmail.com>
    liningjie		<1350445139[AT]qq.com>
    mkg20001		<mkg20001[AT]gmail.com>
    nickvsnetworking	<nick[AT]nickvsnetworking.com>
    pegah hajiani		<pegah_haj[AT]yahoo.com>
    rbroker			<rstbroker[AT]gmail.com>
    shqking			<shqking[AT]gmail.com>
    subhav8			<subhadevi88[AT]gmail.com>
    vahapemin		<vahapemin44[AT]gmail.com>
    zhongweisitu		<zsitu[AT]extremenetworks.com>
    zhudewen		<zhudewen[AT]iauto.com>
    milio Gonzalez		<egg997[AT]gmail.com>
    ric Piel		<piel[AT]delmic.com>
    yvind Rnningstad	<ronningstad[AT]gmail.com>
     		<dmitrycvet[AT]gmail.com>


=head2 Acknowledgements

Dan Lasley <dlasley[AT]promus.com> gave permission for his dumpit() hex-dump routine to be used.

Mattia Cazzola <mattiac[AT]alinet.it> provided a patch to the hex dump display routine.

We use the exception module from Kazlib, a C library written by Kaz Kylheku <kaz[AT]kylheku.com>. Thanks go to him for his well-written library. The Kazlib home page can be found at http://www.kylheku.com/~kaz/kazlib.html

We use Lua BitOp, written by Mike Pall, for bitwise operations on numbers in Lua. The Lua BitOp home page can be found at https://bitop.luajit.org

snax <snax[AT]shmoo.com> gave permission to use his(?) weak key detection code from Airsnort.

IANA gave permission for their port-numbers file to be used.

We use the natural order string comparison algorithm, written by Martin Pool <mbp[AT]sourcefrog.net>.

Emanuel Eichhammer <support[AT]qcustomplot.com> granted permission to use QCustomPlot.

Insecure.Com LLC ("The Nmap Project") has granted the Wireshark Foundation permission to distribute Npcap with our Windows installers.

=for html </div>

=for man .fi
